RH28 Rheumatology

Treatment
+ acute gout
= NSAIDs: high-dose, then taper as symptoms improve
= ice, rest and elevation of the affected limb
= corticosteroids: IA (preferred), PO, or IM (if renal, cardiovascular, or GI disease and/or if NSAIDs
contraindicated or failed). IV for patients with multiple joints flaring, unable to take oral medication,
and already have IV line
«= colchicine: greatest benefit if used within the first 12-24 h. 1.2 mg at the first signs of an attack followed
by 0.6 mg 1 h later and 0.6 mg BID on subsequent days until the attack has resolved. Caution in renal
failure and/or older adults
+ chronic gout
= conservative
+ avoid foods with high purine content (e.g. visceral meats, sardines, shellfish, beans, peas)
« avoid drugs with hyperuricemic effects (e.g. pyrazinamide, ethambutol, thiazide, low dose ASA,
cyclosporine)
additional management of lifestyle factors: limiting alcohol intake, limiting high-fructose corn
syrup, for overweight/obese patients weight loss is recommended (regardless of activity level)
= medical
 antihyperuricemic drugs first line: allopurinol (not nephrotoxic), second line: febuxostat. Both
decrease uric acid production by inhibiting xanthine oxidase. Start low and titrate up. Do not use
febuxostat if history of cardiovascular disease
* uricosuric drugs (probenecid, sulfinpyrazone): very rarely used in combination with allopurinol or
febuxostat in patients in whom hyperuricemia is not controlled with the latter
. few-dose NSAID/colchicine should be started with urate-lowering therapy for 3-6 mo to avoid an acute
are
= inrenal disease secondary to hyperuricemia, use low-dose allopurinol and monitor Cr
+ indications for treatment with uric acid lowering therapy (ULT) include
= attacks (22/yr), tophi, bone erosions/arthritis

.

Definition
+ joint inflammation caused by calcium pyrophosphate (CPP) crystal deposition in connective tissue

Etiology and Pathophysiology

* acute inflammatory arthritis due to phagocytosis of IgG-coated CPP crystals by neutrophils and subsequent
release of inflammatory mediators within joint space

usually monoarticular

slower onset in comparison to gout, lasts up to 2-3 wk but is self-limited

Risk Factors

+ old age, advanced OA, neuropathic joints

+ other associated conditions: hyperparathyroidism, hypothyroidism, hypomagnesemia, hypophosphatasia
(low ALP), hemochromatosis

Clinical Presentation

+ affects knees, wrists, MCPs, hips, shoulders; less likely elbows, ankles, big toe, spine

asymptomatic crystal deposition (seen on radiograph only)

acute crystal arthritis (self-limited flares of acute inflammatory arthritis resembling gout)
pseudo-OA (progressive joint degeneration, sometimes with episodes of acute inflammatory arthritis)
pseudo-RA (symmetrical polyarticular pattern with morning stiffness and constitutional symptoms)
frequently triggered by dehydration, acute illness, surgery, trauma

Investigations
+ joint aspirate: rule out septic arthritis and gout

+ CPP crystals: present in 60% of patients, often only a few crystals, positive birefringence (blue) and
rhomboid shaped

x-rays show chondrocalcinosis in 75%: radiodensities in fibrocartilaginous structures (e.g. knee menisci) or
linear radiodensities in hyaline articular cartilage

Treatment

+ acute CPPD: joint aspiration, IA steroid injection, NSAIDs, cool packs, rest, and splinting

+ chronic CPPD: NSAIDs with gastroprotection and/or low-dose prophylactic colchicine 0.6-1.2 mg/d PO
(controversial)

Toronto Notes 2025

Ce)

2020AmericanCollege of Rheumatology Guideline

forthe Management of Gout

Atti Rheumatol 2020;72:879.95

Inte urate lowering therapy (ULT fr patients with
2ASCtophi
Radiographic damage atiutableto gout
Frequent got fares (22/)

‘Alopurnols prefered overallothe ULI.

agent fora patients fndudng CKD tage 23)

hnite concomitant ant-nflammatory prophylaxis

{€9. colchicine, NSAIDs, prednisoneprednisolne)

for3-6mo

Continue ULT to target and maintain serum urate

<émgidl

‘npatens with equent gout fares ornomreslvng SC

tophi who have failed to achieve serum uate <6 mg

nuricosurics, xanthine oxidase inhibitors, and other

intervention, pegoticae shouldbe initiated andthe

‘arent ULT shouldbe discontinued

Gout fares shoul be managed with NSAIDs, low-dose

Cobchicine, or glucocorticoid as is-ne agents

fist-ne

+ Hip

+ Polyarticular wrist 3
+ Hand (MCP) 8
+ knee £
+ Foot (Ist MTP = podagra) >

Figure 14. Common sites of
involvement of CPPD

e.. forthe Management

of (PPD

Aan Rheum Dis 2014705715

Pharmacological and non-pharmacological

treatment should both be used to manage.

Treating acat CP erst oe
packs, res, joint asp injection of

Tong: acting ect beside

for many patients

Acute CP crystal athitiscan be treated

systemically with NSAIDs and low-dose orl

Colchicine although theiruse may bed in

der patients by torcty and comorbidity

Avi tapering course of oalor parenteral GCS

or ACTH maybe effective foracte CP crystal

‘rophyaxs against frequent recurrent acute CPP
caystalartrts.

Forpatints wth and CPPD, management goals
and options are the same as those for Okalone.

The order of pharmacological preference for chronic
(PP crystal infammatory artis MSAD and!

x colchicine, low-dose corticosteroid MT, and

hydroxychloroquine.

Associated conditions shouldbe treated detected.
There reno dsease-modiying treatments for CPP
caystalartrts and no treatmentisindicated for

asymptomatic chondrocalcinsis

sos

es

