RHI4 Rheumatology

Treatment
+ thrombosis
« lifelong anticoagulation with warfarin
= target INR 2.0-3.0 for first venous event, >3.0 for recurrent event, target INR 2-3 or 3-4 (recurrent
events) for arterial event, or target INR 2.0-3.0 + ASA may be considered
+ obstetric APS
= heparin/low molecular weight heparin + ASA during pregnancy

= continuation of heparin at prophylactic dose for 6 wk after delivery should be considered to reduce the

risk of maternal thrombosis
* catastrophic APS
= high-dose steroids, anticoagulation, cyclophosphamide, plasmapheresis
= any triggering factor (e.g. infections, malignancy) should be treated accordingly
« refractory cases: B cell depletion (e.g. rituximab) or complement inhibition (e.g. eculizamab) may be
considered

Scleroderma (i.e. Systemic Sclerosis)

Definition
+ anon-inflammatory autoimmune disorder characterized by widespread small vessel vasculopathy,
production of autoantibodies, and fibroblast dysfunction causing fibrosis

Scleroderma
(ie. systemic sclerosis)
t 1
Localized Generalized

{no involvement of internal organs)

+ Mostly children and young adults

y v Limited systemic sclerosis. Dittuse systemic sclerosis
Morphea Linear + Skin sclerosis restricted to + Widespread skin disease
«Hard oval patches _- Line of thickened skin hands, face, neck (proximal to wrist, can
‘on the skin + 3rd to 4th decade involve trunk), tendons

+ Pulmonary HTN common + Early visceral involvement
+ CREST (renal, pulmonary fibrosis)

Figure 8. Forms of scleroderma

Etiology and Pathophysiology
+ idiopathic vasculopathy (not vasculitis) leading to atrophy and fibrosis of tissues
« characterized by several hallmark pathogenic features: small vessel vasculopathy resulting in tissue
hypoxia, production of autoantibodies, and fibroblast dysfunction leading to increased deposition of
extracellular matrix
= resembles malignant HTN
= lung disease is the most common cause of morbidity and mortality

Table 18. The American College of Rheumatology (ACR)/European League Against Rheumatism
(EULAR) Criteria for the Classification of Scleroderma”

Hem Sub-item Score

1. Skin thickening of fingersof both hands extending proximal to the MCP 9
(suffcentcriterion)

2. Skinthickening of the fingers Putty fingers 2
Sclerodactyly
3. Fingertip lesions Digtal tip ulcers 4

Fingertip piting scars

4. Telangiectasia 2

5. Abnormal nalfold capillaries 3

6, Pulmonary arterial HTN sILD (max score2) Pulmonary arterial HIM 2
i)

T.Raynavd’s phenomenon 2

8. Scleroderma-related Ab Anti-centromere 2

‘Ant-topoisomerase!
Ant-RNApolymeraselll

* Score of is suficent to classify a patient as having definite scleroderma senstvty0.95, specificity 0.93)

Epidemiology

+ M:F=1:3-4, peaking in 5th decade

+ associated with HLA-DR1 and environmental exposures (silica, epoxy resins, toxic oil, aromatic
hydrocarbons, polyvinyl chloride)

+ limited systemic sclerosis has a higher survival prognosis (>70% at 10 yr) than diffuse systemic sclerosis
(40-60% at 10 yr)

Toronto Notes 2025

CREST Syndrome
Calcinosis

Raynaud's phenomenon
Esophageal dysmotiity
Sclerodactyly
Telangiectasia

Sderodermais the most common cause of
secondary Raynaud's phenomenon

)

Cydophosphamide vs. Mycophenolate Mofetiin
Scleroderma Lung Disease

Lancet Respir Med 2016 4708-719

Study Double bind, randomize, paral goup ia.
Purpose: To compare the toxicity and eficacy of
‘cyclophosphamide vs. mycophenolate mofetion lung
function.

Results: In both treatment groups, the adjusted
percent predicted FCimproved ftombaselne to 24
‘mo, Mycophenolate mofetil was associated with ess
toxicityand was better tolerated.

Condusion: Treatment of SSc1LO with mycophenolate
‘mofeti for2yr or cyclophosphamide for lyr both result
inimproved ling function, However, mycophen olate
mofetil isthe current preference for treatment of SSc-
[LD due to ts better tolerability.

Raynaud's Phenomenon DDx
COLD HAND
CryoglobulinsiCryofibrinogens
Obstruction/Occupational

Lupus erythematosus, other connective
tissue disease

DM/Drugs

Hematologic problems (polycythemia,
leukemia, etc.)

Arterial problems (atherosclerosis)/
Anorexia nervosa

Neurologic problems (vascular tone)
Disease of unknown origin (idiopathic)
