
MU3 Medical Imaging

Approach to Abdominal Computed Tomography

+ look through all images in gestalt fashion to identify any obvious abnormalities
+ look at each organ or structure individually, from top to bottom, evaluating the size and shape of each area
of increased or decreased density

+ evaluate the following:

= soft tissue window

+ liver, gallbladder, spleen, and pancreas

adrenals, kidneys, ureters, and bladder
stomach, duodenum, small bowel mesentery, and colon/appendix
retroperitoneum (aorta, vena cava, and mesenteric vessels; look for adenopathy in vicinity of
vessels)

* peritoneal cavity for fluid or masses

+ abdominal wall and adjacent soft tissue
= lung window

+ visible lung (ba
= bone window

* vertebrae, spinal cord, and bony pelvis

eee

es)

Gallbladder Small bowel
Head of the pancreas ‘ Spleen
Liver Bey S Leftkidney
Right kidney
Blood vessels
a. Aorta

Right crus of diaphragm 1 . b. Inferior vena cava

Vertebra / . Superior mesenteric vein

d. Superior me

Erector spinae muscles ~ e. Leftrenal ar

Figure 19. Axial abdominal computed tomography

CT and Bowel Obstruction

+ cause of bowel obstruction is rarely found on plain films; CT is the best imaging modality

+ the “3,6,9” rule is a very useful guide for determining when the bowel is dilated; the maximum diameter for
the small bowel is 3 cm, for large bowel is 6 cm, and for cecum is 9 cm; this can also be useful to distinguish
small and large bowel, and to assess for ‘impending’ cecal perforation (e.g. post-untreated Ogilvie’s
syndrome)

+ closed-loop obstruction: an obstruction in two locations (usually small bowel) creating a loop of bowel
obstructed both proximally and distally; complications (e.g. ischemia, perforation, necrosis) may occur
quickly

CT Colonography (Virtual Colonoscopy)

+ emerging imaging technique for evaluation of intraluminal colonic masses (i.e. polyps, tumours)

+ two CT scans of the abdomen (prone and supine) after the instillation of carbon dioxide into a prepped
colon

+ computer reconstruction of 2D CT images into a 3D intraluminal view of the colon

+ lesions seen on 3D images correlated with 2D axial images

+ indications: surveillance in low-risk patients, incomplete colonoscopy, or staging of obstructing colonic
lesions



Contrast Studies
Table 10. Types of Contrast Studies
‘Study Organ Procedure Description Assessment Findings
Cine Esophagogram Cervical esophagus Contrast agent swallowed Dysphagia, swallowing ‘Aspiration, webs (partial
Recorded for later playback and incoordination, recurrent ‘ocdusion), Zenker’s diverticulum,
analysis aspiration, postoperativecleft _cricopharyngeal bar, laryngeal

palaterepair

Barium Swallow Thoracic esophagus Contrast agentswallowed Dysphagia, rue out GERD, post- Achalasia, hiatushernia,
underfluoroscopy, selective esophageal surgery
images captured
Upper Gl Series Thoracic esophagus, Double contrast study: Dyspepsia, investigate possible Ulcers, neoplasms, filing defects
stomach, and duodenum 1. Barium to coat mucosa upper Gl bleed, weight loss!
2.6as pills fo distention anemia, post gastic surgery
Patient NPO after midnight
Enterography and Entire small bowel Enterography: patient drinks +2 IBD, malabsorption, weight loss! Neoplasms, IBD, malabsorption,

Enterociysis (MRI or CT) Lofsorbitol, psylium, or barium anemia, Mecke’s diverticulum
solution to distend small bowel

Enteroclysis: MJ tube used to

pump barium, psylium, or

Sorbitol contrast media directly

into small bowel

infection

Specific Visceral Organ Imaging
+ for the management of urgent and emergent peritoneal masses

Liver

+ U/S: assessment of cysts, abscesses, tumours, biliary tree

+ CT +IV: most popular procedure for imaging the liver parenchyma (primary liver tumours, metastases,
cysts, abscesses, trauma, cirrhosis)

+ MRI: excellent in evaluation of primary liver tumours, liver metastases, other parenchymal conditions;
particularly helpful in differentiating common benign hepatic hemangiomas from primary liver tumours
and metastases

+ elastography: measures shear wave velocity by U/S (FibroScan) or MRI (MR elastography) to non-invasively

juantify liver fibrosis

+ findings:

. advanced cirrhosis: liver small and irregular (fibrous scarring, segmental atrophy, regenerating
nodules)

= porto-systemic shunts: caput medusae, esophageal varices, spontaneous spleno-renal shunt

+ U/S: cirrhosis appears nodular and hyperechoic with irregular areas of atrophy of the right lobe and
hypertrophy of the caudate or left lobes

«= CT: fatty infiltration appears hypodense

* some masses require contrast to be visualized

+ upon identifying a liver lesion on imaging (e.g. U/S), the follow-up imaging modality should be CT or MRI.
CT would be four-phase non-contrast, arterial, venous, and delayed to distinguish the common benign liver
lesion hemangioma from other tumours

Spleen

+ U/S,CT, nuclear medicine scan (nuclear medicine only to distinguish ectopic splenic tissue from enhancing
tumours)

+ CT for splenic trauma (hemorrhage)


Colorectal Cancer:CT Colonography and
Colonoscopy for Detection Systematic Review and
Meta-Analysis

aiology 2011258 393405

Purpose: Toassessthesenstivt of computed
tomography colonography (CTC) and optical
colonoscopy (00) for colorectal cance (CR) detection.
Methods: Systematicreview and meta-analysis of
agnostic studies evaluating CTC detection of CRC
based ona prio eligibility ceria, in particular
requiring both OC and histological confimation of
disease. Stuties that abo assessed true-posiive

and false-negative diagnoses with OC were used to
calclate 0C sensitivity Sensitty of CT colonography
and 0Cfor CRC was he main outome.

Results: 49 studies on 1,151 patients undergoing
agnostic study for detection of CRC were induded.
(IChasa sensitivity of 96.1% (95% 93.8% 97.78)
and OChasa senstvty of 4.7% (95%.C190.4%-
51.2}forthe detection of CR,

Conclusion: CTCis highly senstve forthe detection
of Cand maybe a better modality fo tential
investigation of suspected CR, assuming reasonable
specifiy,

‘See Landmark Medical Imaging Trials table
for more information on the AMACING trial

comparing hydration to no hydration in the
incidence of contrast-induced nephropathy.

Normal iver appears more dense than
spleen on CT. Ifless dense, suspect fatty
infiltration

5Hs
Hoc

Hydatid cyst

Hemangioma

Hepatic adenoma
Hyperplasia focal nodular)
