ELOM27 _Ethical, Legal, and Organizational Medicine

this act encouraged the voluntary enfranchisement of Indigenous people. Enfranchisement is the legal
process of exterminating one’s “Indian” status and ancestral rights in order to gain Canadian citizenship.
Later, involuntary enfranchisement would be enforced. This would extinguish the status of any Indigenous
person who served in the armed forces, received a university degree, or became a professional (e.g. lawyer,
engineer, physician)

this act depicts the deliberate intentions of Canadian parliament to erase Indigenous culture and diversity
from Canada. Other assimilatory programs such as residential schools, the Sixties Scoop, and Indian
hospitals have been implemented over various time periods since Confederation. These policies have
created irreparable harm, and much of the poverty and current physical and mental health crises facing
Indigenous communities today can be traced back to these colonial injustices, as well as ongoing colonialist
olicies
Pstrong understanding of these historical factors can equip physicians to provide better care and cultivate a
more empathetic physician-patient relationship

the Indian Act (1876) allows the Canadian government to obtain complete control over First Nations, status,
and reserves. It precluded equal political and economic participation and actually made cultural and
spiritual practices illegal

the Indian Act still exists today but has morphed significantly since its establishment. This act has taken
total political control, imposed foreign governmental structures (band councils), and eliminated the rights
of Indigenous peoples to practice their sacred cultural and spiritual beliefs. Indian agents were government
workers who enforced these laws and were given the power to prevent Indigenous peoples from leaving
their communities. In 1887, Sir John A. MacDonald stated, “The great aim of our legislation has been to do
away with the tribal system and assimilate the Indian people in all respects with other inhabitants of the
Dominion as speedily as they are fit to change”

in terms of health, the Indian Act gives the Governor in Council control over the decisions made
surrounding regulations of public heath and treatment: However, this act doesnot preset any obligation
of the Canadian government to provide health services for Indigenous peoples

Section 141 of the Indian Act prevented Indigenous peoples from gathering and discussing their rights or
hiring legal representation to fight against this oppression

Judge Alfred Scow describes the impact that this has had on his peoples: “This provision of the Indian Act
was in place for close to 75 years and what that did was it prevented the passing down of our oral history. It
prevented the passing down of our values. It meant an interruption of the respected forms of government
that we used to have, and we did have forms of government be they oral and not in writing before any of the
Europeans came to this country. We had a system that worked for us. We respected each other. We had ways
of dealing with disputes”

in 1951, some amendments were made to the Indian Act. The more oppressive sections were amended or
erased, such as the outlawing of sacred practices, the inability to leave reserve without permission of an
Indian agent, the inability to hire legal counsel, and the inability of Indigenous women to vote in Band
Council elections

the Indian Act continued to oppress Indigenous women uniquely by taking away their status if they
married a non-Indigenous man. This means that a woman would have to leave her family and community,
and consequently lose her treaty and health benefits, including her right to be buried on reserve with her
ancestors. The opposite held true for Indigenous men, as it allowed for non-Indigenous women to gain
Indian status through marriage

in the 1970s-80s, Indigenous women began lobbying for equal rights and Bill C-31 was passed that nullified
this law, allowing many women to regain status. However, this law continues to pose significant controversy
as this status is only allowed to be passed down to one generation

Indian status is defined under section 6 of the Indian Act and denotes who qualifies and therefore becomes
award of the government. This is a paternalistic legal relationship that creates two categories of First
Nations status

= 6(1): this person can pass on their status to their children regardless of their partner's heritage

= 6(2): this person can only pass on their status if their partner is also Indigenous

this idea of status complicates the identities of many Indigenous peoples (including non-status First
Nations, Métis, and Inuit peoples who do not fall under the Indian Act) who are prevented from registering
and therefore lose government support, their treaty, and health benefits. They also lose their ability to:

= participate in community politics

= partake in land claims

= connect to their ancestral lands

this displacement and the misconception that non-status peoples are “less Indian” is extremely harmful
and often serves as a platform for lateral violence. In this context, lateral violence refers to when a member
of an oppressed group behaves in a malicious or violent manner towards another member of that same
oppressed group or in a lower position of power. Lateral violence can be traced back to the impact of
colonialism

Toronto Notes 2025
