ELOM28 —_ Ethical, Legal, and Organizational Medicine

Indigenous individuals are generally subject to full taxation, though individuals with status are eligible
for select tax exemptions through section 87 of the Indian Act. It is a pervasive and harmful myth that
Indigenous individuals do not pay taxes. For the most part, exemptions only apply to financial matters
located on-reserve, with complex and specific criteria to be met. Matters located off-reserve are generally
taxed in full. A summary of this is available in Bob Joseph’s “Dispelling Common Myths about Indigenous
Peoples” https://www.ictinc.ca/hubfs/ebooks/ebooks%202019/Common%20Myths%20eBook%20July%20
2019.pdf

the Indian Act is a controversial piece of legislature because it undermines the nationhood and sovereignty
of Indigenous peoples. However, it is important to understand the Indian Act because it also provides the
basis for the historical and constitutional relationship between Indigenous peoples and the Canadian
government. Therefore, it cannot be easily removed without having significant ramifications

Movement Towards Reconciliation

in 1991, the Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples (RCAP) was formed to address the inequities that
exist, and to work to repair the relationship between Indigenous peoples and Canada. This commission was
brought about after the Oka Crisis. The Oka crisis (The Mohawk Resistance) arose from a long-standing
history of rejection and ignoring of Indigenous land rights by the Canadian government, and resulted
in a 78-day protest of a proposed golf course expansion onto sacred Mohawk territory. The RCAP report
(1996) detailed extensive research and recommendations needed to heal and restructure the relationship
between Indigenous and non-Indigenous peoples. The majority of these recommendations have not been
tmplemented and there continues to be little government interest in the constitutional issues that affect
igenous peoples and communities

in 2008, the Prime Minister of Canada apologized to all those who were affected by the residential school
system, where Indigenous children were forced into abusive schools (see Public Health and Preventive
, Colonization and Healthcare, PH7). The Truth and Reconciliation Commission was born out

ofa settlement agreement between the government and residential school survivors. The mission of this
commission is to learn and tell the stories of those who attended these schools. This commission hopes to
bring about renewed relationships and healing based on mutual understanding and respect. To achieve this
goal, the commission put out 94 Calls to Action aiming to bring us closer to reconciliation. These calls urge
all levels of the Government of Canada to work together to address systemic inequities by changing policies
and programs that continue to oppress Indigenous peoples. Under the category of health, the following
recommendations are quoted below:
we call upon the federal, provincial, territorial, and Aboriginal governments to acknowledge that
the current state of Aboriginal health in Canada isa direct result of previous Canadian government
policies, including residential schools, and to recognize and implement the healthcare rights of
Aboriginal people as identified in international law, constitutional law, and under the Treaties
we call upon the federal government, in consultation with Aboriginal peoples, to establish measurable
goals to identify and close the gaps in health outcomes between Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal
communities, and to publish annual Progress reports and assess long-term trends. Such efforts would
focus on indicators such as: infant mortality, maternal health, suicide, mental health, addictions, life
expectancy, birth rates, infant and child health issues, chronic diseases, illness and injury incidence,
and the availability of appropriate health services
in order to address the jurisdictional disputes concerning Aboriginal people who do not reside on
reserves, we call upon the federal government to recognize, respect, and address the distinct health
needs of the Métis, Inuit, and off-reserve Aboriginal peoples
we call upon the federal government to provide sustainable funding for existing and new Aboriginal
healing centres to address the physical, mental, emotional, and spiritual harms caused by residential
schools, and to ensure that the funding of healing centres in Nunavut and the Northwest Territories is
a priority
we call upon those who can effect change within the Canadian healthcare system to recognize the value
of Aboriginal healing practices and use them in the treatment of Aboriginal patients in collaboration
with Aboriginal healers and Elders requested by Aboriginal patients
we call upon all levels of government to:

i. increase the number of Aboriginal professionals working in the healthcare field

ii. ensure the retention of Aboriginal healthcare providers in Aboriginal communities

iii, provide cultural competency training for all healthcare professionals
we call upon medical and nursing schools in Canada to require all students to take a course dealing
with Aboriginal health issues, including the history and legacy of residential schools, the United
Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, Treaties and Aboriginal rights, and
Indigenous teachings and practices. This will require skills-based training in intercultural competency,
conflict resolution, human rights, and anti-racism

+ going forward as healthcare professionals, we are uniquely responsible for knowing and understanding the
impact these historical and legal truths have on our patients. When addressing health inequities that are
disproportionately experienced by Indigenous peoples, we need to take into account the impact of 500 years
of colonialism. We need to understand how our patients and their ancestors have experienced structural
violence and trauma in order to address their physical, mental, emotional, and spiritual health needs.
Physicians need to understand that we are all treaty people, and that the above legislation not only applies
to Indigenous peoples, but to physicians as well, and all those who benefit from these laws

Toronto Notes 2025
