ELOM25 Ethical, Legal, and Organizational Medicine

Clinical Informatics and Eth

Key Terms

Health Informatics
+ isthe study of information design and use in healthcare

Clinical Informatics

is the application of health informatics knowledge in the clinical setting to promote quality care. It has
three domains: collection of longitudinal personal health information for direct patient care, exchange
of health information between services and locations, and aggregation of health data for analysis using
analytics, artificial intelligence, and machine learning

Digital Health
+ isthe use of information technology and electronic communication tools, services, and processes to deliver
healthcare services

Overview of Digital Health Technologies

Table 6. Overview of Digital Health Technologies and Relevant Ethical Considerations

Digital Health Technologies Definitions Ethical Considerations
EMR (Electronic Medical Record) System of electronically sored patent health Impact of threats to healthcare information
information na digital format Privacy ad confidently
Secu beaches
EHR (Electronic Health Record) Digital colection ofmedcalinfermation (9. patent's
healthhistory, allergies, immunizations, reatment __$¥Stemimplementation
plans, Data entry inaccuracies
US {Laboratory Information System) Computer software that processes, stores, and
manages data fromall stagesof medal processes
andtests

PACS (Picture Archiving and Communication System) Computer software providing storage and acessto
images trom multiple modalities

Indige Heal

Overview of the History and Impact of Colonialism

the Indigenous health crisis that exists today is a result of many factors, including the impact of colonial
laws, oppression, and genocide

Indigenous health is deeply connected to the land and freedom that have been systematically stolen from its
people

physicians can consider how oppressive legislation plays a role in precluding many Indigenous patients
from experiencing health

you might find this timeline outlining “Key Moments in Indigenous History” helpful: http://education.
historicacanada.ca/files/426/Key_Moments_in_Indigenous_History_Timeline.pdf

long before the arrival of European newcomers, Indigenous peoples lived on and cared for Turtle Island
(now known as North America). This history is richly steeped in culture, relationships, and a holistic
worldview. The Indigenous peoples had a flourishing trade, complex social and legal systems, and scientific
knowledge about astronomy, ecology, agriculture, and medicine. Despite hundreds of years of adversity,
Indigenous peoples and their rich cultures persist and thrive today - an indication of the resilience and
tenacity of Indigenous peoples and communities

upon European arrival, Indigenous and non-Indigenous people formed friendships based on mutual
respect. These relationships were formalized through treaties. Treaties provided a framework for
relationships and the sharing of Indigenous lands in a peaceful and respectful way

one example of how treaties were documented and enacted was through wampum belts. Wampum belts are
intricate visual displays made from clam shells. These belts serve as a living record of agreements. The two-

row wampum belt is particularly important for understanding the relationship between Indigenous peoples
and Europeans

Toronto Notes 2025
