ELOMI4 _ Ethical, Legal, and Organizational Medicine
2. Legislation
= mental health legislation allows for:
+ the detention of patients without their consent
* psychiatric outpatients may be required to adhere to a care plan in accordance with community
treatment orders
= Public Health legislation allows medical officers of health to detain, examine, and treat patients
without their consent (e.g. a patient with TB refusing to take medication) to prevent transmission of
communicable diseases
3. Special Situations
= public health emergencies (e.g. an epidemic or communicable disease treatment)
= warrant for information by police

Consequences of Failure to Obtain Valid Consent

+ treatment without consent is battery (a claim in tort, meaning a civil legal matter, as opposed to a criminal
legal matter), even if the treatment is life-saving (excluding situations outlined in Exceptions to Consent)
treatment of a patient on the basis of poorly informed consent may constitute negligence, also a claim in
tort

the onus of proof that valid consent was not obtained rests with the plaintiff (usually the patient)

Overview of Capacity
* capacity is the ability to:
= understand information relevant to a treatment decision
= appreciate the reasonably foreseeable consequences of a decision or lack of a decision
capacity is specific for each decision (e.g. a person may be capable to consent to having a CXR, but not fora
bronchoscopy)
capacity can change over time (e.g. temporary incapacity secondary to delirium)
most Canadian jurisdictions distinguish capacity to make healthcare decisions from capacity to make
financial decisions; a patient may be deemed capable of one, but not the other
a person is presumed capable unless there is good evidence to the contrary
capable patients are entitled to make their own decisions
capable patients can refuse treatment even if it leads to serious harm or death; however, decisions that put
patients at risk of serious harm or death require careful scrutiny

Assessment of Capacity
the person undergoing the assessment of capacity must be informed that they will be assessed
capacity assessments must be conducted by the clinician providing treatment and, if appropriate, in
consultation with other healthcare professionals (e.g. another physician or inter professional healthcare
rovider)
cna capacity assessment may include specific capacity assessment
at hand);
1. effective disclosure of information and evaluation of patient's reason for decision
2. understanding of:
— the condition
— the nature of the proposed treatment
— alternatives to the treatment
— the consequences of accepting and rejecting the treatment
— the risks and benefits of the various options
3. for the appreciation needed for decision-making capacity, a person must:
— acknowledge the symptoms that affect them
— beable to assess how the various options would affect them
— beable to reach a decision, and make a choice, not based primarily upon delusional belief
general impressions
input from psychiatrists, neurologists, etc. for any underlying mental health or neurological condition that
may affect insight or decision-making
employ “Aid to Capacity Evaluation” or any other capacity assessment tool/guideline
a decision of incapacity may warrant further assessment by psychiatrist(s), legal review boards (e.g. in
Ontario, the Consent and Capacity Review Board (CCB)), or the courts; the patient has the right to a hearing
before the CCB
if found incapable by the Consent and Capacity Review Board, patient must receive notice of their ability to
pursue judicial review (and essentially appeal the determination)

capacity specific to the decision

Treatment of the Incapable Patient in a Non-Emergent Situation
+ obtain informed consent from SDM
important to distinguish the cause of incapacity (mental illness vs other) to determine appropriate
legislation. The Mental Health Act only covers detention and treatment of patients with specific conditions
an incapable patient can only be detained against their will to receive treatment if they meet criteria for
certification under the Mental Health Act (see Psychiatry, PS60); in such a situation:

= document assessment in chart

= notify patient of assessment using appropriate Mental Health form(s) under the Mental Health Act

(Form 42 or Form 30 in Ontario)
= notify Rights Advisor

Toronto Notes 2025

Aid to Capacity Evaluation
JGen intern Med 1999;14(1):27-34

Ability to understand the medical problem
Ability to understand the proposed
treatment

Ability to understand the alternatives (if
any) tothe proposed treatment

Ability to understand the option of refusing
treatment or of it being withheld or
withdrawn

Ability to appreciate the reasonably
foreseeable consequences of accepting the
proposed treatment

Ability to appreciate the reasonably
foreseeable consequences of refusing the
proposed treatment

Ability to make a decision that is not
substantially based on delusions or
depression

Capacity Assessment Criteria in Ontario
Test for understanding: can the patient
‘explain the information you have gen
them in their own words?

Test for appreciation: can they explain how
that information relates to them personally?
Refer to: JAMA The Rational Clinical
Examination “Does This Patient Have
Medical Decision-Making Capacity?

Incapable Patient
‘Note: Capacity is treatment-specific and
time-specific. An incapable patient is only
incapable for the specific treatment at the
specific time

not already present, perform a formal
‘capacity assessment and thoroughly
document

Identify ifthe patient has an SDM or who
has their POA and locate it, if applicable
Check the patient's chart for any Mental
Health Forms (e.g. Form) or any forms
they may have on their person (e.g. Form
2)
