ELOM26 —_Ethical, Legal, and Organizational Medicine

in 1613, Kanienkehaka (Mohawk) peoples noticed that settlers were using and living on their traditional
lands. The Haudenosaunee Confederation met and discussed how they could live and work together
peacefully on the land. Through these discussions, they learned much about one another and the two-row
‘wampum was created: “In one row is a ship with our White Brothers’ ways; in the other a canoe with our
ways. Each will travel down the river of life side by side. Neither will attempt to steer the other's vessel.”
This wampum represented three principles: friendship, peace, and the concept of forever

soon after these treaties were forged, greed and colonial policies began to erode these relationships

the treaties and the rights they established with Indigenous peoples became an inconvenience to the
expanding European empire, and consequently, they began to be ignored, as they continue to be today

the Doctrine of Discovery was the piece of colonial law that let European explorers ‘discover’ lands
previously occupied for thousands of years. This doctrine arose from a series of statements from the Pope,
which morally and legally justified the dispossession of lands from their Indigenous inhabitants (Terra
Nullius)

this justification is based erroneously on the supposed ‘inferiority’ of Indigenous peoples to their ‘superior’
European counterparts. This allowed monarchs to exploit North American land and resources regardless
of its original caretakers and use the power of this doctrine to extinguish Indigenous rights. This doctrine
continues to have devastating impacts on Indigenous peoples in Canada

igo NaNCMOUUUELENOL AMANO Nene wUUbR NN
HALON MOONE OAL UOT UTTAR

apetot tee temet 4
rere ee
nc a TT

enengnn tig ata even UtHUE NN Le veNA pe ee Lateran cata tdE
Hr nA ea HUOORE HD LLIONINIEE
een ONAN ne a ENE aU yn TONG VOLTAGE HELE

Figure 3. Image of a two row wampum belt. It represents friendship, peace, and the concept of forever
Bonaparte D The Two Row Wampum Be: An Arwesasne Taito ofthe Vessel and Canoe [nteret. place unknown: The People's oie. 2005 kag [ted 2020 Ap 16. Aalablefrom:
Itp/twivn vampunchroncles.com/tworowwampumbel. nl

in 1763, King George III issued the Royal Proclamation that delineated the process of British settlement
of Indigenous lands. This proclamation gave ownership of North America to King George III; however, it
stated that Indigenous title existed and would continue to exist. Therefore, any land would belong to the
Indigenous people unless otherwise noted and agreed upon in a treaty. This prevented European settlers
from taking possession of land that was occupied by Indigenous peoples, unless already purchased by the
Crown

this document unequivocally recognizes Indigenous rights, title, and self-determination. To this day,

no law has overruled the Royal Proclamation; therefore, it is still valid according to Canadian law.
Additionally, the notion of Indigenous rights is protected in section 25 of the Constitution Act. Although
Indigenous rights cannot be legally diminished or extinguished, the Canadian government frequently
disregards this fact

in 1764, the year following the Royal Proclamation, the Treaty of Niagara would lay the foundation for the
relationship between the Crown and First Nations and their coexistence on Turtle Island. At this instance,
the Silver Covenant Chain of Friendship was affirmed and both Indigenous and British sovereignty were
recognized. The Treaty of Niagara established a multinational familial relationship between the Crown and
the Indigenous nations

over 2000 Indigenous dignitaries, representatives of 24 Indigenous nations across Turtle Island, were
present, and the 24-nation wampum belt was created. This wampum represents the relationship between
the Indigenous nations and the Crown

the British North America (BNA) Act of 1867 (later renamed the Constitution Act, 1982) gave the Canadian
government control over “Indians” (notably excluding Inuit and Métis peoples). This act included New
Brunswick, Nova Scotia, Ontario, and Québec as a new self-governing federation. This laid the foundation
for Canada’s laws and governance and the rights of those living in the territory now defined as Canada. The
BNA Act stated that the federal government had jurisdiction over “Indians and lands reserved for Indians.”
Indigenous peoples were not involved in conversations or proceedings associated with the passing of this
act

in 1857, An Act for the Gradual Civilization of the Indian Tribes in Canada passed and later absorbed under
the larger umbrella of the Indian Act

“it is desirable to encourage the progress of Civilization among the Indian Tribes in this Province, and the
gradual removal of all legal distinctions between them and Her Majesty's other Canadian Subjects, and to

facilitate the acquisition of property and of the rights accompanying it, by such Individual Members of the
said Tribes as shall be found to desire such encouragement and to have deserved it”

Toronto Notes 2025
