ELOMI9 Ethical, Legal, and Organizational Medicine

.

obtaining truly informed consent is difficult due to the complexity of genetic information and

the inability to know precisely what will/will not occur as a result of such testing (e.g. people may
receive unexpected and unwanted genetic information after consenting to the testing)

related to the above, consent to genetic testing and consent to disclosure of all genetic information
that results from the test may be distinct

some patients may want to be informed of genetic test results in particular ways (e.g. with a
support person present). In the case of delivering complex information, genetic counselling may be
recommended

duty to maintain confidentiality vs. duty to warn family members (e.g. if a patient's sister is likely
predisposed to the same genetic condition as your patient, what are your responsibilities to the
sister, if any?)

risk of psychological harm

risk of experiencing unjust social discrimination if such genetic information is disclosed to certain
parties

.

.

.

oe

Legal Aspects
as of 2017, the Genetic Non-Discrim ination Act exists

genetic testing requires informed consent

physicians are obligated to inform patients that prenatal testing exists and is available

in some specific circumstances, a physician may be able to breach confidentiality in order to warn family
members about a condition if harm can possibly be prevented via treatment or prevention. In general,

the patient's consent is required, unless the harm to be avoided is sufficiently serious to rise to the level of
imminent risk of serious bodily harm or death (i.e. not a chronic condition, but an acute life-threatening
condition). It is recommended to consult with legal counsel and bioethics if complexities arise in regard to
breach of confidentiality/duty to warn

End-of-Life Care

Overview of Palliative and End-of-Life Care
+ focus of care is comfort and respect for person nearing death and maximizing quality of life for patient,
family, and loved ones
= palliative care is an approach that improves the quality of life of patients facing life-threatening illness,
through the prevention and relief of suffering, including treating pain, physical, psychosocial, and
spiritual concerns
= early palliative care leads to improved quality of life and mood, fewer aggressive end-of-life treatments,
and extended median survival time compared to patients receiving standard care
appropriate for any patient at any stage of a serious or life-limiting illness
may occur in a hospital, hospice, in the community, or at home
often involves an interdisciplinary team of caregivers
addresses the medical, psychosocial, and spiritual dimensions of care
palliative sedation: the use of sedative medications for patients that are terminally ill to relieve suffering
and manage symptoms
+ withdrawing or withholding life sustaining interventions (e.g. artificial ventilation or nutrition) that are
keeping the patient alive but no longer wanted or indicated

Medical Assistance in Dying
+ medical assistance in dying: the administering or prescribing for self-administration, by a medical
practitioner or nurse practitioner, of a substance, at the request of a person, that causes their death

Common Ethical Arguments/O;
+ criminally prohibiting medical assistance in dying may influence some individuals to end their own lives
and/or to endure intolerable suffering until their natural death occurs

patient has the right to make autonomous choices about the time of their own death

belief that there is no ethical difference between the acts of euthanasia/assisted suicide and forgoing life-
sustaining treatments

belief that these acts benefit terminally ill patients by relieving suffering

belief that patient autonomy has limits and that one cannot and/or should not be allowed to make an
autonomous request to end one’s life

death should be the consequence of the morally justified withdrawal of life-sustaining treatments only in
cases where there is a fatal underlying condition, and it is the condition (not the withdrawal of treatment)
that causes death

an argument presented in the Carter case (see below) suggested permitting MAID will detract support for
palliative care, since with proper palliative care, the number of requests for MAID would decrease. This

argument was rejected in Carter v. Canada, as it was deemed unacceptable to make people suffer intolerably

to potentially improve and/or increase support for palliative care

Toronto Notes 2025

tive Care — Not the Same as Medical
Assistance in Dying

Palliative care is an approach designed to
improve symptoms and quality of life for
the duration of a person’s lif, but unlike
Medical Assistance in Dying, it does not
aim directly at or intend to end the person's
life. Many palliative care physicians are
incorporating MAID into their practice,
though some may conscientiously object

