ELOM22 _ Ethical, Legal, and Organizational Medicine
the patient or delegate must obtain access within a reasonable period of time, usually upon a
written request
« the physician can charge a reasonable fee for this service
in the hospital, physicians must ensure their own competence, respect hospital by-laws and regulations,
practice only within the limits of granted privileges, cooperate with other hospital personnel, and maintain
hospital records

Research Ethics

involves the systematic analysis of ethical dilemmas arising during research involving human subjects to
ensure that:

«= study participants are protected

«= study participants are treated in accordance with relevant research ethics norms, including but not

limited to: respect for persons, concern for welfare, and justice

« clinical research is conducted to serve the interests of the participants and/or society as a whole
the protection of research participants is of the utmost importance when conducting clinical research
a Research Ethics Board (REB) is responsible for reviewing and approving proposed human research. REB
approval is required prior to commencing a research study involving humans
an ethical dilemma arises for physician researchers when their obligation to patients as their physician
comes into conflict with research obligations and/or incentives as a researcher. Physicians pursuing
research should not be the primary point of contact responsible for recruiting and consenting their own
patients due to the possibility of therapeutic misconception and/or feelings of undue influence/lack of
voluntariness
REB offices located within hospitals may have requirements about who can/cannot recruit and/or consent
patients for their possible participation in research
the Human Research Standards Organization (HRSO) develops and publishes national standards for those
interested in overseeing, conducting, and/or Participating in human research activities in Canada. All
published national standards can be accessed here: https://www.hrso-onrh.org
in order to become aware of all relevant research ethics principles and norms, of which there are many
(the above-mentioned principles and norms are far from an exhaustive list), it is recommended that you
read Declaration of Helsinki, the Belmont Report, and complete the Tri-Council Policy Statement: Ethical
Conduct on Research Involving Human Subjects (TCPS2) online training. The TCPS 2 (2022) can be
accessed here: Tri-Council Policy Statement: Ethical Conduct for Research Involving Humans - TCPS 2
(2022) (ethics.ge.ca)

Ethics on Research with Indigenous People
the Ownership, Control, Access, and Possession (OCAP) principles are “a set of standards that establish
important ground rules about how Indigenous peoples’ data should be collected, protected, used, or
shared”
OCAP principles are:
= control: Indigenous peoples, their communities, and representatives have the right to control all aspects
of “research and information management processes that impact them”
= access: “Indigenous peoples must have access to information and data about themselves and their
communities regardless of where it is held”
= possession: Indigenous peoples are stewards of the data. As they possess the data, it is within their
jurisdiction and control
researchers working with Indigenous communities are expected to uphold OCAP principles in their
research
First Nations, Inuit, and Métis (FNIM) communities are self-determining, and as such, may have their own.
version of OCAP. Investigators should respect each community's autonomy with respect to research, data
collection, analysis, interpretation, and knowledge transfer
Chapter 9 of the TCPS2 discusses and provides considerations regarding research involving FNIM Peoples
of Canada. This chapter can be accessed here: Tri-Council Policy Statement: Ethical Conduct for Research
Involving Humans - TCPS 2 (2022) - Chapter 9: Research Involving the First Nations, Inuit and Métis

Peoples of Canada (ethics. c.ca)
TheFistNatonsPcpesof CAP ntl, Alesse (Ost NatonsInomatin Governance Cente (FUG; 2020 2020p 1A am: wi. cOCP OCAPE
isaregteredadenako he Fist ats nmation Governance Cente ME}

Toronto Notes 2025

Guiding Principles for Research Ethics
There are a number of principles that are
importantto research ethics —the three

listed are primary ones that are typically
cited, but this list is non-exhaustive.

Respect for persons: informed consent
Beneficence: harm vs. benefit

Justice: avoid exploitation/unjustified
exclusion criteria

Informed Consent for Research

Purpose of study

Expectations ofthe research participant

Name and probabilty of harm and benefits
Whether and/or how participants can
withdraw their consent to participate
Confidentiality (eg. how wil itbe
‘maintained? Are participants going to
be deidentified and anonymized?)
Privacy (eg. for how long will
partidipants’ data be stored?)

Nature of physician's participation including

compensation

Proposals for research must be submitted
to a Research Ethics Board (REB)

