ELOMI8 _Ethical, Legal, and Organizational Medicine

Assisted Reproductive Therapies

+ includes non-coital insemination, hormonal ovarian stimulation, and IVF

+ some commonly referenced, ethically complex topics related to assisted reproductive therapies (ART)
include, but are not limited to:

donor anonymity vs. child-centred reproduction (i.e. knowledge about genetic medical history)

preimplantation genetic testing for diagnosis before pregnancy

use of new techniques without patients appreciating their experimental nature

moral status of embryo

access to ART

private vs. public funding of ART

social justice factors influencing one’s access to and/or experiences with ART (e.g. same-sex couples

having an opportunity to access welcoming, morally safe 2SLGBTQQIA+ spaces to receive care)

the ‘commercialization’ of reproduction (e.g. surrogates)

Fetal Tissue
+ pluripotent stem cells can currently be derived from human embryonic and fetal tissue
use of stem cells in research is reviewed by the Stem Cell Oversight Committee as part of the CIHR
+ potential uses of stem cells in research:

«= studying human development and factors that direct cell specialization

evaluating drugs for efficacy and safety in human models

cell therapy: using stem cells grown in vitro to repair or replace degenerated/destroyed/malignant
tissues (e.g. Parkinson's disease)
genetic treatment aimed at altering somatic cells (e.g. myocardial or immunological cells) is acceptable
and ongoing

Induced Abortion

+ CMA definition of induced abortion: the active termination of a pregnancy before fetal viability (fetus >500
gor >20 wk GA)

full CMA policy on induced abortion can be accessed here: https://www.cmaj.ca/content/139/12/1176a

after a CMAJ publication in 2006, several letters to the editor were published, questioning the CMA’s
position on induced abortion. In response, the CMA published clarification of their stance. This
clarification can be accessed here: Clarification of the CMA’s position concerning induced abortion | CMAJ
(a)

Ethical and Legal Concerns and Arguments

in Canada, there is no criminal prohibition regarding abortion

termination of pregnancy is a medical and personal decision to be made in consultation with a healthcare

provider, alongside anyone else the patient wishes

there exist various reasons as to why a person may inquire about and choose to pursue termination of
regnanc’

termination of pregnancy is a value-laden and moralized topic. Healthcare providers, even those who

conscientiously object to termination of pregnancy, ought to treat all patients requesting such termination

with dignity, respect, and ina person-centred manner. It is of particular importance to be cognizant of

one’s own biases when caring for patients who want to receive a medical treatment that does not accord

with one’s personal belief system and preferences

if a medical practitioner does not provide termination of pregnancy, an effective referral to a willing and

available provider must be made without delay. From an ethics perspective, it is important to demonstrate

continued trustworthiness and support, recognizing that trusting one’s providers can influence health

outcomes

2nd and 3rd trimester abortions are legal in Canada, but are usually, though not exclusively, pursued

when there are risks to the person's health, if the fetus died in utero, and/or if the fetus has a known major

irreversible condition which may subject them to poor health outcomes upon birth (e.g. anencephaly).

In any of these cases, however, itis the choice of the pregnant individual as to whether or not they will

maintain or terminate pregnancy

Prenatal/Antenatal Genetic Testing
+ uses:
1. to confirm a clinical diagnosis
2. to detect genetic predisposition to a disease
3. genetic testing/learning of predispositions may allow for preventative steps to be taken and help the
person prepare for the future
4, gives parents the option to terminate a pregnancy or begin early treatment if/as applicable
= ethical dilemmas may arise because of the sensitive nature of genetic information; important ethical
complexities and considerations related to genetic testing may include:
+ the individual and familial implications (e.g. how will learning about information confirmed via
genetic testing influence one’s family dynamic?)
its pertinence to future disease
its ability to identify disorders for which there are no effective treatments or preventive steps (e.g.
should a person know if they/their fetus is genetically predisposed to an incurable disease? Would
the potential harms of knowing this information potentially outweigh the benefits?)
its ability to identify the sex of the fetus, which may or may not be desired and/or relevant
information to one’s decision-making

oe

.

Toronto Notes 2025
