NP44 Nephrology

Toronto Notes 2025

Trial Name Reference (Clinical Trial Details
ELECTROLYTE DISTURBANCES
BICAR ICU Title: Sodium bicarbonate therapy for patients with severemetabolicacidaemiain the intensive care unit (BICAR-ICU):a multicentre, open-label, randomized controlled,
phase3trial
Purpose: Toassess the potential benefits ofsodium bicarbonate infusion onoutcomes incrticallyill patients.
Methods:A multicenter, open-label, randomized controlled phase 3 trial was conductedin 26 ICUs in France. Critical i adult patents withsevere acidaemia were
randomly assigned toreceive sodium bicarbonateinfusion or notreatment. The primary outcome measured death andorgan failure.
Results: 389 patients were enrolledin the study. The primary outcome occured in 7% of the control group and 66% ofthe bicarbonate group. The probability of survival
at day 28 was not significantly different between the groups, except for patients inthe Acute Kidney Injury Network stratum. Adverse events were more common inthe
bicarbonate group, but no life-threatening complications were reported.
‘Conclusions: Sodium bicarbonate had no effect onthe primary outcome in patients withsevere metabolic acidaemia, but benefited those with acute kidney injury
SALT NEJM 2006;16:2099-412 Title: Tolvaptan, aSelective Oral Vasopressin V2-Receptor Antagonist, for Hyponatremia
Purpose: Investigate whether tolvaptan mightbe of benefit nhyponatremia.
Methods: Patientswith euvolemic ot hypervolemic hyponatremia were randomized to oral tohaptan 15 mg daily or oral matched placebo. The primary endpoints were
‘changes in daily area-under-the-curve for serum a’ concentrations.
Results: Serum Na concentrationsincreased more inthe tolvaptan roupthanplaceboduring the fist 4d (P<0.001) and ater 30d (P 0.001). Side effects included dry
rst, and increased urination.
‘Conclusions: In ptientswith ewvolemic or hypervolemic hyponatremia, tolvaptan, anoral vasopressin V2-receptor antagonist, was effective in increasing serum Nar
‘concentrations.
SMART NEJM 2018;378:829-39 Title: Balanced Crystallids versus Saline in Noncitically Il Adults
Purpose: To examine the clinical impactof using balanced cy tallaids comparedto saline for routine intravenous fluid therapy in noncriically ill aduts inthe
‘emergency department.
Methods: Ina single-center trial, noncritcally il adults in the emergency department received either balancedcrystalloids or saline for intravenous fluid therapy. The
study assessed hospita-free days and major adverse kidney events as outcomes
Results: 13347 patients were enolled, receiving ether balanced cystalloidor saline inthe emergency department. Hspital-free days were similar between the
‘groups. However, the incidence of major adverse kidney events within 30 d was lower inthe balanced crystalois group compared to saline.
‘Conclusions: No disparity in hospta-fee days was observed between balanced crystallois and saline treatments in nonciicalill adults receiving intravenous lus.
OPALHK NesM 2015;372:211-21 Title: Patiromerin Patients with Kidney Disease and Hyperkalemia Receiving RAAS Intibitors
Purpose: Assess the saety and efficacy of ptiomer, aK binder, in reatinghyperkalemia,
Methods: Patientswith CKD receiving RAAS inhibitors with serum K levels of 5.16.5 mmol/L received patromer for 4 wk. The primary efficacy endpoint wasthemean
‘change in serum levels from baseline to week 4. Subsequently, 107 patients were randomly assignedtopatiromer or placebo or the randomized withdrawal phase.
Results: The median increase in  levelsfrom baseline was greater with placebothan with patiromer (P<0,001). Arecurrence of hyperkalemia ocurred in 60% of
placebo patents comparedwith 15% inthe patomer group,
Conclusions: In CKO patients receivngRAAS inhibitors and who had hyperkalemia, patromer treatment was associated with adecrease in serumK’levelsand a
reduction hyperkalemia recurrence.
DIABETIC NEPHROPATHY

ACElandDiabetic ——_-NEJM1993;329:1456-62

BENEDICT NEJM 2004;351:1941.51
DETAIL NEJM 2004,351:1952-61
INT NEJM 2001;345:85-60
RENAAL NEJM 2001;345:861-69

Title: The Effect ofAngiotensin-Comverting Enzyme Inhibition on Diabeticephropathy
Purpose: Determine whether captopi haskidney- protecting properties independent of BP control patients wit dabetc nephropathy.

Methods: Patients with nsalin-dependent DM were randomized to captopril or placebo. The primary endpoint was a doubling of the baseline serum.

Results: The associated risk reductions ofthe primary endpoint was 48%in the captopril goup. Serum Cr concentrations doubled in 25 patients inthe captopril group
‘compared to 43 patients inthe placebo group. The meantate of decine inCr clearance was 1% per yrin the captopril group and 17% inthe placebo group.
Conclusions: Captopril protects against deterioration inrenal function in insulin-dependent diabetic nephropathy and i significantly more effective than BP control
alone.

Title: Preventing Microalbuminuria in Type 2 Diabetes

Purpose: Assess whether ACEI andnon diydropyridine calcium channel blockers (CCBs) alone or in combination, prevent microalbuminuria patients with HTH and
720M.

Method:1204 patients were randomized to3 yrof treatment wth trandolapril2 mg dil
placebo. The primary endpoint was the development of persistent microalbuminu
Results: The primary outcome was reached in of combination patents, 6% of randolapil patents, 11.9% of verapamil patients, and 10% of placebo patent
Serious adverse events were similar among al treatment group.

‘Conclusions: Treatment with ACEI trandolapi alone or randolapri combined with verapamil decreased theincidence of microalbuminuria in patients withT2DM and
HTN with normoalbuminuria,

Title: Angiotensin Receptor Blockade versus Converting-Enzyme Inhibition in Type 2 Diabetesand Nephropathy
Purpose: Compare renoprotectve effects of ARBs and ACEIsin patients withT2DM.

Methods: 250 patients with 120M and early nephropathy were randomized to either telmisartan 80 mg
‘change in GFR betweenbaseline and last available value, during the S yr study period.

Results: At Sy, the change in GFR was 179 mLimin/1.73 m2 with telmisartan, compared with 4.9 mLimin/1.73 m2 with enalapril (dference-3.0 ml/min/1.73 m2;95%
0161016).

‘Conclusions: The ARB elmisartan and the ACEI enalapril areequalyeffectivein slowing rena function deterioration in T2DM with mild tomoderate HTN and ealy
nephropathy.

Title: Renoprotective Effect ofthe Angiotensin-Receptor Antagonist Irbesartanin Patients with Nephropathy Due to Type 2 Diabetes

Purpose: Assess whether the AR ibesartanor the CCB amlodipine slow progression of nephropathy inpatients withT2DM independently of BP effects.

Methods: 1715 hypertensive patients with nephropathy dueto T20M were randomized tirbesartan 300 mg daily, amlodipine 10 mg daily, or placebo. The primary
‘endpoint was a composite ofthe doubling of baseline serum Cr, development of ESRD, oral-cause mortality

Results: Treatment with besartan was associated with a rate of primary endpoints 20% lower than placebo (P=0.02)and23% lower than amlodipine (P=0.006).
‘Treatment with rbesartan was associated witha RR of ESRD23% lower thanthat in both other groups (?=0.07 for both comparisons). These differences were not
‘explained by BP changes.

Conclusions: Treatment wth irbesartan reduced the rskof developing ESRD and worsening renal function inpatients wth T2DM and diabetic nephropathy.

Title: Effects of Losartanon Renal and Cardiovascular Outcomes inPatientswith Type 2 Diabetesand Nephropathy
Purpose: Assess the role of ARB losartan inslowing progression of renal disease, in patients with T2DM and nephropathy.

Methods: 1513 patients were randomized to losartan 50-100 mg daily or placebo, in addtionto conventional antihypertensive treatments. Te primary outcome was &
‘composite of the doubling of serum Cr, ESRD, or mortality.

Results: 327 patients inthe losartan group, compared with 359 in the placebo group, achieved the primary endpoint (isk reduction 16%; P-0.02) Losartan reduced the
incidence of the doubling of serum Cr (risk reduction 25%; P-0.006) and ESRD (riskreduction28%;P=0.002), with no effect on mortality.

Conclusions: Losartan conferred significantrenal benefits inpatients with T2DM and nephropathy, and was generally well-tolerated.

plus verapamil SR 180 mg diy, trandolapril alone, verapamil alone, or

‘or enalapri 20 mg daily. The primary endpoint was @

