1D37 Infectious Diseases

Treatment and Prevention

+ supportive care

+ in persons living with HIV, (re)initiate ART and try to increase their CD4 count to >100; if fails, try
nitazoxanide or macrolides

+ good personal hygiene, water filtration

Blood and Tissue Infections

PI

ismodium spp. (Malaria)

Etiology

+ transmission of Plasmodium spp. (P. falciparum, P. vivax, P. ovale, P. malariae, P. knowlesi) primarily
occurs during the blood meal of an infected female Anopheles mosquito

sporozoites injected during the blood meal then infect human liver cells, where they multiply and are

released as merozoites; merozoites infect red blood cells and cause disease

+ infection with malaria parasites can also occur via vertical transmission (rare) or blood transfusion

occurs in tropical/subtropical regions (sub-Saharan Africa, Oceania, South Asia, Central America,

Southeast Asia, South America)

Clinical Features
+ flu-like prodrome (may include fever, chills, fatigue, diaphoresis, cough, rash, arthralgias, myalgias,
headache, GI symptoms)
+ paroxysms of high spiking fever and shaking chills (due to synchronous systemic lysis of red blood cells)
that can last several hours
«= P. vivaxand P. ovale: chills and fever x 48h but can be variable
«= P. malariae: chills and fever x 72 h but can be variable
= P. falciparum: less predictable fever interval, can be highly variable
abdominal pain, diarrhea, myalgia, headache, and cough
hepatosplenomegaly and thrombocytopenia without leukocytosis
>90% of patients infected with P. falciparum are ill within 30 d
relapsing malarial attacks may occur after many months due to the reactivation (entering the erythrocytic
cycle) of dormant liver hypnozoites of either P. ovale or P. vivax
+ complications:
= P. falciparum (most common and most lethal): CNS involvement (cerebral malaria = seizures and
coma), severe anemia, acute kidney injury, ARDS, primarily responsible for fatal disease
= P. knowlesi, and rarely P. vivax, can be fatal

Investigations
+ CBC screen (assess for triad of: thrombocytopenia, elevated LDH, and anemia)
+ microscopy: blood smear q12-24 h (x3) to rule out infection
= thick smear Giemsa stain) for presence of organisms
= thin smear (Giemsa stain) for species identification and quantification of parasites
+ rapid antigen detection tests
+ PCR

Treatment and Prevention
+ all spp. of malaria can lead to severe infection (P. falciparum most likely to cause severe disease and death)
= markers of severity: clinical features + parasitemia
= in any patient with clinical evidence of severe disease: parenteral treatment (artemisinin combination
therapy)
P. falciparum: most areas of the world show chloroquine resistance - check local resistance patterns
= artemisinin combination therapy (e.g. artesunate + doxycycline or artemether-lumefantrine)
= atovaquone/proguanil combination (Malarone’)
= quinine + doxycycline or clindamycin
= mefloquine and artemisinin resistance increasing in southeast Asia (check local resistance)
P. vivax, P. ovale: chloroquine (and primaquine or tafenoquine to eradicate liver forms)
P. vivax, chloroquine resistant: atovaquone/proguanil + primaquine [or tafenoquine] or quinine and
doxycycline + primaquine [or tafenoquine]
P. malariae, P. knowlesi: chloroquine
prevention with antimalarial prophylaxis (although quality may vary regionally), covering exposed skin,
insecticide-treated bed nets, insect repellent
prevention of relapse for P. vivax: primaquine or the newly FDA-licensed tafenoquine (in patients >16 yr
who are receiving appropriate antimalarial therapy for acute P. vivax infection)
vaccine

Toronto Notes 2025

Cochrane DB ys Rev2017;C0006491
Purpose: To summarize efficacy and safety of
mefloquineused as prophyfanis for malariain

traeles.

Methods: Randomized controltials(foefficacy and
safety and non-randomized cohort ties (for safety)
tocompareprophylacticmefoguinewith placebo, no
treatment, or alternative antimlaialagent.

Results: Participants were more likely to discontinue
tefioquie (6% vs. atovaquone-proguand (3%) due to
adverse effec fnduding nausea, vomiting, abnormal
dreams, insomnia, amity, and depressed mood
during travel). No difference in serious adverse elects
x discontinuation due to adverse effects was found
between mefoquine and doxycyctine or mefloquine
and chloroquine

Condusion: Absolut sk of malaria during short-term
travel appears ow with mefloquine, doxycyctine,

and atovaquone-proguanil therapy Choice of agent
depends on how individual travelers assess importance
ol specticadverse effects, pillburden, and cost

‘Malaria is the most common fatal infectious
disease worldwide

‘XL@7

1. Sporozoites enter blood via mosquito bit,
infectiver

2 Hepatcinfitation

3. Infect red blood cells,

4, Trophozoite divides asexually mary
times to produce schizont (contains
merozoites)

'5, Redblood cel lyses and merozoites
attack other ed blood cells (chil and fever)

6, Male and female gametooyts (om
eros nese by mosquito dng be

7. Male and female gar
mmerozoes use nmosquo gut

ookinete

produce

£8, Ookinete matures into an oocystwhich
contains individual sporozotes; migates to
‘mosquito salivary glands

Figure 12. Life cycle of Plasmodium
spp.
