IDS Infectious Diseases

Mycology

Fungal Basics
+ fungi are eukaryotic organisms with the following morphologies:
1. yeast (unicellular)
2. moulds, i.e. filamentous fungi (multicellular with hyphae)
3. dimorphic fungi (found as mould at room temperature but grow as yeast-like forms at body
temperature)

Table 4. Membrane and Cell Wall Compositions

Membrane Sterol Cell Wall
Bacteria - Peptidoglycan

Human Cell Cholesterol -

Fungi Ergosterol Chitin (complex glycopoly saccharide)

Mechanisms of Fungal Disease
+ primary fungal infection by:
= overgrowth of normal flora (e.g. Candida spp.)
= inhalation of fungal spores
= traumatic inoculation into skin
+ toxins produced by fungi (e.g. ingestion of aflatoxins)
+ allergic reactions to fungi (e.g. bronchopulmonary aspergillosis)

Parasitology

Parasite Basics
+ parasite: an organism that lives in or on another organism (host) and damages the host in the process
+ parasites with complex life cycles require more than one host to reproduce
= reservoir host: maintains a parasite and may be the source for human infection
= intermediate host: maintains the asexual stage of a parasite or allows development of the parasite to
proceed through the larval stages
= definitive host: allows the parasite to develop to the adult stage where reproduction occurs
+ 3 major groups of parasites: protozoa, helminths, and ectoparasites; some arthropods are also parasitic
+ see Table 26, ID33 and Table 27, 1D39 for examples of clinically important parasites

Table 5. Differences Between Protozoa and Helminths

Protozoa Helminths

Unicelluar Maiticellular

Motil trophozote inactive cyst Adu egg larva
Multiplication No multiplication in human host

Eosinophilie unusual Exsinophilia (proportonalto extent of tissue invasion)”
Indefinite lifespan Definite lifespan

“Adult Ascaris (roundworm) doesnot cause eosinophilia; migratory larval phases ofAscars, however, cause high-grade eosi

Mechanisms of Parasitic Disease
1. mechanical obstruction (e.g. ascariasis, clonorchiasis)
2. competition with host for resources (e.g. anemia in hookworm disease, vitamin B12 deficiency in
diphyllobothriasis)
. cytotoxicity leading to abscesses and ulcers (e.g. amoebiasis, leishmaniasis)
. inflammatory response
= acute hypersensitivity (e.g. pneumonitis in Loeffler’s syndrome)
= delayed hypersensitivity (e.g. egg granulomas in schistosomiasis)
= cytokine-mediated (e.g, systemic illness of malaria, disseminated strongyloidiasis)
5. immune-mediated injury
= autoimmune (e.g. myocarditis of Chagas disease, tissue destruction of mucocutaneous leishmaniasis)
= immune complex (e.g. nephritis of malaria, schistosomiasis)

ra

Toronto Notes 2025

h

non-septate hyphae

© Man-San Ma 2014 after Janice Wong, 2012)

Figure 4. Common fungus
morphology

Apicomplex Sporozoite
{no obvious means of locomotion)

‘Amoeba

Ciliate
(cilia)

ce ©)
Flagellate
(flagella/whip-like)

© Janice Wong

Figure 5. Classification of protozoa
based on movement

Diagnostic testing that relies on direct
detection for parasites (e.g. microscopy)
‘may need to be repeated on several
‘occasions before infection can be ruled out
