FMI5 Family Medicine

Table 7. Pharmacologic Treatments for Smoking Cessation

Drug Mechanism Dosage Prescribing” Contraindications

Seizure disorder
Eating disorder
MAOluseinthepast 14d
Simultaneous use of bupropion
(Welibutrin®) for depression

Bupropion Inhibits reuptakeof dopamine 1.150. mg qgAMx3d
andor NE 2.Then 150 mgBIDx
Sideettets:insomnia, dry mouth 7-12 wk

3.For maintenance
‘consider 50 mg BID for
wpto6mo

1.05 mg gill x34
2.Then 0.5 mg BID x4 4
3. Continue 1 mg BID x12
wks additional wkas
maintenance

1.Decide ona quit date
2. Continue to smoke for first 2 wk
of treatment and then completely stop
(therapeutic levels reached int wk)

Vareniciine Partial nicotinic receptor
‘agonist, and partial competitive
antagonist of nicotinic receptor

Sideetects: nausea, vomiting,

‘constipation, headache, dream

‘disorder, insomnia, increased risk
‘of psychosis, depression, suicidal
ideation

‘Decide ona quit date (e.gday 8)
2. Startvarenicline then quit on day 8

Caution with pre-existing psychiatric
condition

‘Alternatively, a gradual quit dateis acceptable
(estat varenicine and reduce smoking 50%
by wk 4, reducean additionalS0% by wk 8,
‘and continue reducing with a goal of complete
abstinence by wk 12)

“Bupropion and varenicline maybe wsed in combination with RT

. Pregnant patients: counselling is recommended as first line treatment
+ NRT should be made available to pregnant women who are unable to quit using non-pharmacologic
methods
«= intermittent NRT use (lozenges, gum) is preferred over continuous dosing of the patch
= no strong evidence that either major positive or negative outcomes were associated with gestational use of
bupropion or varenicline; consider using only if benefits outweigh risks
+ unwilling to quit
= motivational intervention (5 Rs)
1, Relevance to patient
— relevance to patient's disease status or risk, family or social situation (e.g. having children in
the home), health concerns, age, gender
2. Risks of smoking
— short-term: SOB, asthma exacerbation, impotence, infertility, pregnancy complications,
heartburn, URTI
— long-term: MI, stroke, COPD, lung cancer, other cancers
— environmental: higher risk in spouse/children for lung cancer, SIDS, asthma, respiratory
infections
3. Rewards: (benefits)
— improved health, save money, food tastes better, good example for children
4. Roadblocks: (obstacles)
— fear of withdrawal, weight gain, failure, lack of support
5. Repetition
— reassure unsuccessful patients that most people try many times before successfully quitting
(average number of attempts before success is 7)
* recent quitter
« highest relapse rate within 3 mo of quitting
+” minimal practice: congratulate success, encoura; ongoing abstinence, review benefits and risks
prescriptive interventions: address problem(s) of weight gain, negative mood, withdrawal, lack of
support

Alcohol Use

+ see Psychiatry, PS28

Definition
+ alcohol use disorder diagnostic categories occur along a continuum

Epidemiology

+ 10-15% of patients in family practice misuse alcohol

+ 20-50% “of hospital admissions, 10% of premature deaths, 30% of suicides, and 50% of fatal traffic accidents
in Canada are alcohol-related

+ more likely to miss diagnosis in women, elderly, and patients with high socioeconomic status

Assessment
+ screen for alcohol dependence with CAGE questionnaire
= if CAGE is positive, further explore for the possibility of alcohol misuse or dependence
+ assess drinking profile
= setting, time, place, occasion, with whom
= impact on family, work, social life
= quantity-frequency history
 howmany drinks per day?
+ how many days per week?
* maximum number of drinks on any one day in the past month?
+ the Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT) is another useful tool to assess alcohol use, drinking
behaviours, and alcohol-related problems
+ if identified positive for alcohol use disorder:
screen for other drug use
identify am medical psychiatric complications (e.g. delirium tremens or withdrawal seizures)
ask about drinking and driving
ask about past recovery attempts and assess current readiness to change

Toronto Notes 2025

a

Physician Advice for Smoking Cessation
Cochrane DB Syst Rev 2013 5:€D000165

Purpose: Toassesstheefetvenes of physician
adviein promoting smoking cessation, compare
minimal physician interventions with more intensive
interventions, assess the effectiveness of various aids
insmoking cessation, and determine the effect of ant-
samoking advice on mortality,

Methods: Systematic review of CTs of smoking
cessation advice oma medical practitioner
Abstinence was assessed 26 mn after advice was fist
provided.

Results: Trials with ove 31000 smokers were
identified, Most common setting for advice delivery
was primary care. A signfcant increase in quitting
rates was noted with advice vs no advice (R 1.65,
95% C1 142-19), which wasfurtherinceased where
the intervention was considered more intensive QR
1.84, 95% C11.60-213; ns). Intensive advice showed
small, non-significant advantage vs. minimal advice
when direct compared (@R 1.37, 95% C11.204.56). A
smallbeneft wit folow-up visits was also noted. No
statistical significant ference in mortatyat20yr
follow up was found,

Condusion: Simple advice canincreasesmoking
cessation rates by 3% on op of the unassisted quit
rate, Mote intensive advice and providing followup
support may further increase quitrates,

Standard Drink Equivalents

One standard drink = 13.64 g of pure
alcohol

Beer Cider/Cooler (5% alcohol) = 12 oz
Malt liquor (7% alcohol) = 8-9 oz

Wine (12-17% alcohol) = 5 oz

Fortified wine = 3 oz

Hard liquor (40%) =1.5 02

CAGE Questionnaire
Have you ever felt you needed to Cut down
‘on your drinking?

Have people Annoyed you by criticizing
your drinking?

Have you ever felt Guilty about drinking?

Have you ever felt you needed a drink first
thing in the morning (Eye-opener) to steady
your nerves or to get rid of a hangover?

Two “yes” responses is considered positive
