FM6 Family Medicine
Screening pathway ‘Anyone with a ceria? Sie pegaticie smerny poe peo
pathway meen es
Asymptomatic’ “Boy sD Cerecl annem OF syptons mest DE

Seagee Graerreen'e spies eg Smpe
: greasps greotngs
Tirarr angen rope ay eat ordain sad eee
sass
High grade:
ssci inf ASC
Repeat cytology in 12 month: ay

(romanian) (aseus ) (Womamman) ——- (ascos )

NormavNILM.

(woman) = (oases) (Coma) (Gases)

Raumto qtoogy Reumo ytology
screening evely 3yees? Refer tocoposcopy screening every 3 yeas

Risk-based screening in primary care after discharge from colposcopy

Discharged from colposcopy with
HPV test, where available

HPV result at discharge. HPV result at discharge Cytology resut at discharge: Tr ||
Negative for oncogenic HPV HPV positive Normal cytology ASCUSISIL ology

Return to cfoogy “anual screening wih Retum to cpovogy “anual screening with
screening every 3 years ogy screening every 3years olay

Figure 2. Ontario screening pathway for cervical cancer

‘AGUS = atypical glandular cells of unknown significance; ASCUS = abnormal squamous cells of unknown significance; ASC-H = abnormal squamous cells,
‘cannot rule out HSIL; HSIL~ high grade squamous intraepithelial lesion; LSIL = low grade squamous intraepithelial lesion; AGC = atypical glandular cells;
AIS = adenocarcinoma in-situ; 12= transitional zone

‘Maple trom: Ontario Cervical Screning Program 2022 Screening Recommendations Summary. Reproduce with permission fom Cancer Care Ontario. (ference: tps.
«cancercareontaioasystem/ies force Mervative/OCSPScreeningGuideines pd)

Prostate Cancer Screening Guidelines

2014 Canadian Task Force for Preventive Care Guidelines Recommendations

+ for men ages 55-69, recommend not screening for prostate cancer with the PSA test (weak recommendation;
moderate quality evidence); clinicians should discuss the risks and benefits of screening and its potential
consequences with each man in the context of his preferences

for men ages <55, recommend not screening for prostate cancer with the PSA test (strong recommendation;
low quality evidence)

for men ages 270, recommend not screening for prostate cancer with the PSA test (strong recommendation;
low quality evidence)

Basis of Recommendation
+ the potential small benefit from PSA screening is outweighed by the potential significant harms of the
screening and associated follow-up treatment e.g. bleeding, infection, urinary incontinence, false positive
results, and overdiagnosis
= for men ages <55 or 270, there is no evidence that screening with the PSA test reduces mortality,
whereas there is evidence of harms
= for men ages 55-69, there is inconsistent evidence of a small potential benefit of screening and evidence
of harms

‘The Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care is anticipating the publication of new prostate cancer
screening guidelines in 2026. Please refer to the published Systematic Review Protocol for the new guidelines:
https://systematicreviewsjournal.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13643-022-02099-9

Toronto Notes 2025
