FM10 Family Medicine

« bariatric surgery:
+ consider for patients with BMI 240 kg/m? or BMI 235 kg/m? with >1 adiposity-related disease (e.g.
T2DM)
+ consider for weight loss and/or to control adiposity-related diseases when optimal medical and
behavioural management has been insufficient to produce significant weight loss
« choice of bariatric procedure should be decided according to the patient’s needs, in collaboration
with an experienced interprofessional team (suggest against adjustable gastric banding and single
anastomosis gastric bypass, due to unacceptable complications and long-term failure)
+ Step 4- Agree: agree on goals of therapy with the patient, focusing on the patient’s values to ensure realistic
expectations, sustainable behaviour change, and improved health outcomes
+ Step 5 - Assist: follow up and reassess the patient regularly to assist with drivers/barriers and advocate for
improved obesity care

Figure 4. 2006 Canadian clinical practice guidelines on the management and prevention of obesity in adults and
children
Agape atom: Lau DW, etl. 2006 Canaan chic ractice guidelines on he management an prevention of obesity adults and cir [summary CMAJ2007.16S1S13

Toronto Notes 2025

ular Diets without Specific Calorie
eight Los Outcomes: Systematic
Review of Findings from Clinical Trials
Nutrients 2017 9:6822

Purpose: Toassesstheshorerm(c6 ma) andlong-
‘erm{26%mo) weight oss outcomes for current popular
letsn overweight and obese adults.

Methods: systematic review was conducted. All
letsin the 2016 US. News & Worl Report Rankings
fox “Best Weight-Loss its” were examined. From the
potent 38 diets, eligible studies included rials with
a sample sae =15 per group, intrventinna nical
tials, intervention prods 12, BMl225 mg/n2,
participants aged 18 yr and objective measures of pe-
and pos intervention,

Results Sisten articles wereinduded inthe review.
Diets inc ded the Atkins, DASH, Glycemic nde,
editeranean, Onish Paleolithic, and Zone diets,
The Atkins det showed the mos nical significant
reduction in weight ossin both the short-term and
longterm,
Conclusion: Othe diets had ited evidence
supprtng ther effectiveness in producing cinicaly
significant short-term andlong-term weight ss
Future stgis are needed to compare and evaluat the
efficacy ofthese othe diets,

Etec of intermittent Energy and Carbohydrate

fe JMtr 2013,10:15341547
Purpose: To determine if intermittent energy and
carbohydrate restiction (CR) mayresutin greater
improvements in insulin sensitivity and weight control
than day energy restiction OER}

ethos: Ino ECR regimens wee tse, incding
ne which allowed ad ibitumprotein and fat (ECR +
FF) Overnight women r=15) ages 20-69 witha
{amiyhistry of rest cancer were randomized tan
nerall 25% energy restriction, ora 25% ER, ran ECR
+PFfora 3m weight oss period and moof weight
aaintenanc (ECRorIECR+ Pfr tit.

Rests Insulin resistance reduced withthe IER ets
and thelECR PF det eductons wit the IECRdiets
‘weresignicaty grater compared with the DER
diet. Both IE Rgroups had grater reductionsin body
{atcompared withthe DER group, Ding the weight
maintenance phase, tay of ECR rIECR+ PF per
_week maintained the reduction in insulin resistance
and weight.

Conclusion: the shorter, ECR s superior toDER
with espectto improved insulin sensitivity and body
fatredctn,

