PH26 Public Health and Preventive Medicine

Additional Precautions
+ precautions that are necessary in addition to Routine Practices for certain pathogens or clinical
presentations. These precautions are based on the method of transmission (e.g. contact, droplet, airborne)
contact precautions (e.g. gastroenteritis, scabies, conjunctivitis)
= gloves
= gown
= dedicated equipment
«= clean and disinfected shared care items
«= single room with dedicated toilet and patient sink
Droplet (e.g. mumps, whooping cough, meningococcal disease)
« facial protection (e.g. mask or respirator in conjunction with eye protection)
«= single room with dedicated toilet and patient sink
= cohorting of those confirmed to have the same infectious agent may be acceptable
Contact + droplet (e.g. seasonal influenza, COVID-19, streptococcal pharyngitis)
Airborne (e.g. TB, measles, varicella)
= N95 mask (fit-tested)
= negative pressure room

The International Health Regulations (IHR)

+ aninternational agreement involving 196 nations to prevent, protect against, control, and provide a public
health response to pandemics

+ a public health emergency of international concern (PHEIC) is “an extraordinary event which is determined
to constitute a public health risk to other States through the international spread of disease and to
potentially require a coordinated international response”

+ the IHR Emergency Committee provides the WHO Director-General with temporary recommendations on
PHEIC events

+ examples: smallpox, poliomyelitis caused by wild-type poliovirus, human influenza caused by a new
subtype, COVID-19, SARS, mpox

Env mental Heal

Definition
+ study of the association between environmental factors (both constructed and natural) and health
+ environmental exposures
= four common hazards: chemical, biological, physical, and radiation
= four main reservoirs: air, food, water, and soil
= three main routes: inhalation, ingestion, or absorption (skin)
+ usually divided into two main settings
= workplace (including schools): may see high level exposure in healthy individuals (see Occupational
Medicine, PH30)
= non-workplace: lower levels of exposure over a longer period of time; affects vulnerable populations
more severely, such as at extremes of age, and the immunosuppressed; may be teratogenic
+ health impacts of the environment also include factors (e.g. urban planning) and how individuals interact
with the built environment (e.g. safe pedestrian and bicycle paths can facilitate more active lifestyles)

Table 11. Environmental Health Jurisdiction
Public Health Unit

Enforcement of water andfood safety regulation (including restaurant food safety)
Assessment of local environmental risks

Monitoring and follow-up of reportable diseases.

Investigation of environmental contamination, clusters of disease

Municipal Government

Provincial and Territorial Government

Waste disposal, recyling, water and sewage treatment/olection/distribution

Water andair quality standards
Industrial emission regulation
Toxic waste disposal

Federal Government Designating and regulating toxic substances.
Regulating food products (c.9. Health Canada (rugs), Canadian ood Inspection Agency (CFIA)

Setting policy for pollutants thatcan travel across provincial boundaries

International Multilateral agreements (e.g. Kyoto Protocol, United Nations Conventionon Climate Change, International Joint Commission)

Source-Path-Receiver Model
+ to prevent workplace injuries, strategies can be implemented to improve the safety profile of the source,
modify the path, and/or protect the receiver

Environmental Risk Assessment

and Risk Assessment (HIRA) should have four steps, using the National
Academies of Sciences Approach (1984)
1. Hazard Identification

= what is the hazard involved?

= assess potential hazards by taking environmental health history

Toronto Notes 2025

Environmental Health Jurisdiction -
Taking an Environmental Health History
CMAJ 2002; 166(8):1049-1055

Asking about exposures using the
‘mnemonic below may prompt further
discussion.

(CH20PD2

Community

Home

Hobbies

Occupation

Personal habits

Diet

Drugs

Ifa possible hazard is identified, ask
detailed questions to learn about the
nature and level of the hazard. Then, check
Time, Place and Person:

Time: When did symptoms begin? When did
the exposure begin? When do symptoms
get worse? When do they improve?
Place: Where is the patient when
symptoms get worse? Where is the lkely
hazard? What isthe route of exposure
through which the hazard reaches the
patient?

Person: Does anyone else have similar
symptoms? Who? When? Where?

BPA, The Toxin Concer of 2009
Bisphenol A (BPA) s a chemical compound
found in some hard, clear, lightweight
plastics and resins. According to the NIH,
‘animal studies suggest that ingested BPA.
‘may imitate estrogen and other hormones,
In October 2008, Canada became the first
country in the world to ban the import

and sale of polycarbonate baby bottles
containing BPA, stating that although
‘exposure levels are below levels that cause
negative effects, current safety margins
need tobe higher. The US FDA does not
consider normal exposure to BPA to be a
hazard, however the NIH has some concern
that fetuses, infants, and children exposed
to BPA may be at increased risk for eatly-
onset puberty, prostate, and breast cancer

Cannabis Legalization and Driving Under
the Influence of Cannabis (DUIC)

Source: Pubic Health Ontario, Evidence riet-rving
Under the nlvence of Cannabis, 2017

Since the Government of Canada stated

its commitment to legalize cannabis via
the Cannabis Act (Bill C-45) on April 13,
207, the Canadian Task Force on Cannabis
Legalization and Regulation specifically
noted driving impairment as an important
consideration. Higher cannabis use,
camnabis-dependence, lower perceived risk
from DUIC, and normative beliefs about
DUIC were identified as risk factors. As
such, an act to amend the Criminal Code
Bill C-46 was simultaneously introduced to
enable the police to request an oral fluid
sample for foadside drug screening and to
implement THC per se whole blood limits
‘2 ng/ml punishable). Public health was
also advised to devise population-based
interventions such as 6 hour waiting period
recommendations before driving, as well
as preventive strategies through addiction
services, mass-media campaigns, and
school-based instructional programs,
