PH33 Public Health and Preventive Medicine

Appendix — Mandatory Reportin

Reportable Diseases

As an essential part of the public health system, physicians in Canada are required by provincial lawto
report certain diseases to public health. Physician reporting is also outlined by provincial physician licensing
Colleges (e.g. College of Physicians and Surgeons of Ontario (CPSO)). Failure to report can result in suspension
of a license to practice.
+ The reasons that reporting is mandatory include:

1, to identify and control an outbreak

2. to prevent spread if the disease presents a significant threat to individuals or a subset of the

population (e.g. Lassa Fever)

. if the disease is preventable with immunization (e.g. polio, diphtheria, congenital rubella)

a

4. if infected individuals require education, treatment, and/or partner notification (e.g. gonorrhea, TB)

5. surveillance (to monitor disease trends over time)
‘Acquired Immunodeficiency 2.*MERS “Group A Streptococcal disease,
‘Syndrome (AIDS) 3.*COVID-19 invasive (GAS) “Measles
‘Acute flaccid paralysis Group B Streptococcal disease, “Meningitis, acute:
Amebiasis *Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease, all types neonatal 1. “Bacterial
‘Anaplasmosis Cryptosporidiosis 2.Viral
“Anthrax Cyclosporiasis “Haemophilus influenzae disease, all 3. Other

“Diphtheria types, invasive “Meningococcal disease, invasive
Babesiosis “Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome Mumps
Blastomycosis *Hemorthagic fevers, including:
“Botulism Echinococcus multilocularis infection 1. “Ebola virus disease Ophthalimia neonatorum
“Brucellosis Encephalitis, including: 2. "Marburg virus disease
4. Primary, viral 3 “Lassa Fever Paralytic shelfish poisoning

Campylobacter enteritis 2.Post infectious 4.“Other viral causes Paratyphoid fever
Carbapenemase-Producing 3. Vaccine-related “Hepatitis, viral: Pertussis (whooping cough)
Enterobacteriaceae (CPE) infection 4, Subacute sclerosing 1 "Hepatitis A “Plague
‘oF colonization panencephalitis 2.Hepatits B Peumococcal disease, invasive
Chancroid 5. Unspecified 3 Hepatitis C “Poliomyelitis, acute
Chickenpox (Varicella) Powassan Virus
Chlamydia trachomatis infections Food poisoning, all causes Influenza, including ‘Novel strains _—Psttacosis/Ornithosis
“Cholera
“Clostridlum diffcle infection (CD) “Gastroenteritis, Outbreaks in Legionellosis *OFever
‘outbreaks in public hospitals institutions and public hospitals Leprosy “Rabies
“Coronavirus, novel including Giardiasis Lsteriosis “Respiratory infection outbreaks in
1. *SARS Gonorthea lyme Disease institutions and public hospitals

Diseases of Public Health Significance

Diseases marked with * (and Influenza in institutions) should be reported immediately to the Medical Officer
of Health by either telephone or fax. Other diseases can be reported the next working day by fax, phone, or
mail. Each province/territory has a similar legislation.

Other Reportable Conditions

+ in addition to reporting diseases, physicians have a legal responsibility to report certain conditions. The
list below highlights some reportable conditions for Ontario, but is not exhaustive. See your jurisdiction's
regulatory body for the full list

Live Births, Stillbirths, and Deaths — to the Registrar General or Coroner

+ all live and stillbirths must be reported within 2 business days

+ aphysician with sufficient familiarity of a patient's illness or who was in attendance of a deceased patient's
last illness must complete and sign the medical certificate of death

+ physicians must contact a coroner or the police if patient is suspected to have deceased from violence,
misadventure, negligence, misconduct or malpractice, or any cause other than disease; by unfair means;
during pregnancy or postpartum from circumstances reasonably attributed to the pregnancy; suddenly
and unexpectedly; from an illness not treated by a legally qualified medical practitioner; or under
circumstances that may require investigation

Child Abuse — to Local Children’s Aid Society (CAS)

+ all child abuse and neglect where reasonable grounds to suspect exist (including physical harm, emotional
harm, sexual harm, and neglect)

+ ongoing duty to report: if additional reasonable grounds are suspected, a further report to CAS is necessary

Gunshots Wounds - to Local Police Service
+ all patients with gunshot or stab wounds should be reported as soon as is practical
+ self-inflicted knife wounds are not reportable

Toronto Notes 2025

Rubella
Rubella, congenital syndrome

Salmonellosis
“Shigellosis

“Smallpox and other
Orthopoxviruses induding
Monkeypox

Syphilis

Tetanus
Tichinosis
Tuberculosis
Tularemia
Typhoid Fever

“Verotoxin-producing E. coli
infection indicator conditions,
including Hemolytic Uremic.
‘Syndrome (HUS)

West Nile Virus illness

Yersiniosis
