PH30 Public Health and Preventive Medicine

Disaster Preparedness, Emergency Response, and Recovery

a disaster is defined by the Medical Council as “a serious disruption of the functioning of a society, causing
widespread human, material, or environmental losses that exceed the ability of the affected society to cope
using only its own resources.”

disaster exposure is usually quantified as number of people or assets affected

disasters can be mitigated by implementing early detection systems and disaster preparedness programs

Causal Conditions Leading to Disasters
+ Natural Hazards
= weather and climate change can cause extreme weather events, droughts, wildfires, flooding, and
earthquakes

= infectious disease outbreaks and pandemics
Human System Hazards
«= technological hazards such as industrial or structural failures
= chemical, biological, radiological, nuclear hazards
« social unrest, cybersecurity, armed conflict, terrorism
Multi-Level Hazard
= combinations of the above

Responding to Disasters

Prevention: preventative actions taken to stop potential disasters from occurring (e.g. food and water

safety standards)

Mitigation: actions taken to lessen the impact of a disaster that cannot be prevented (e.g. earthquake proof
uildings)

Preparedness: the process of planning, training, and education to ensure individuals will take appropriate

actions to prevent and mitigate disasters

Response: actions that occur before, during, and immediately after a disaster where regular operations are

suspended (e.g. search and rescue missions) to prevent loss of life, injury, or other health consequences

Recovery: activities that restore damaged infrastructure and systems to resume regular operations (e.g.

rebuilding damaged structures)

Emergency Response

Emergency Response Plan (ERP): to prepare for disasters, organizations may develop an ERP which is

a document outlining the policies, procedures, roles and responsibilities of various parties to coordinate
action (e.g. Ontario provincial emergency response plan)

Incident Management System (IMS): during the response phase of a disaster, an IMS will provide
guidelines for standardizing responses to an incident, including personnel, facilities, equipment, financing,
procedures, and public information communications

Emergency Operations Centre (EOC): a centralized facility or location to coordinate the entire response to
a disaster

Continuity of Operations Plan (COOP): provides guidelines on how critical functions and services will be
maintained in the event of a disaster (e.g. maintaining operations of a physician's office during a disaster)

Occupational Medicine

+ occupational medicine is defined by the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada as a medical
discipline that emphasizes prevention and deals clinically and administratively with the health needs of
both individuals and groups with respect to their working environments and includes the recognition,
evaluation, control, management and rehabilitation of occupationally related diseases and injuries.
occupational health involves the prevention of illness or injury and the promotion of health in the work
environment

* services encompass recognizing and controlling exposure to hazards (primary prevention), occupational
health surveillance and screening (secondary prevention), and treatment, rehabilitation, return to work,
and worker's compensation (tertiary prevention)

occupational disease often looks clinically the same as non-occupational disease and, without a thorough
occupational health history, may go unrecognized as distinct

+ occupation is a social determinant of health

Toronto Notes 2025

Taking an Occupational Health Hx:
ACS

What do youdo?

How do you do it?

‘Are you concerned about any particular
‘exposures on or off the job?
Co-workers or others with similar
problems?

Satisfied with your job?

‘Source: J Occup Environ Med 1998 ;40: 680-684

Occupational Health Statistics

In 2022, 993 workers died of workrelated
‘causes in Canada

12022, the total number of lost time
daims in Canada was 348,747

Provincial and territorial compensation
boards do not cover all workplaces (eg
‘most agricultural workers)
Compensation board insurance coverage
ranges across provinces and territories.
from 74-99% of the workforce

‘Source: 2020 Report on Work Fatality and injury Rates
inCanada

Information about worker's compensation
at: https:/lawebc.orglen!
