PHIL Public Health and Preventive Medicine

Table 4. Ideal Criteria for Screening Tests

Disease Test Health Care System

Causes signficantsuffering and/or death
Natural history must be understood

High sensitivity
Safe, rapid, easy, relatively inexpensive

‘Adequate capacity for reporting, follow-up, and
‘treatment of positivescreens

Musthavean asymptomatic stage that can be ‘Acceptable to HCPs andthe population Cost effective

detectedby atest Continuously utilized Sustainable program

Early detection and intervention must resultin (Gear policy guidelines on who to treat
improved outcomes

‘Adapted fom: Shah CP, Public Health and Preventive Medicine in Canada, Sthed. Toronto: Esevir, 2003

Health Promotion Strategies

+ health promotion refers to the process of enabling individuals and communities to increase control over,
and improve, their health and well-being through a range of social and environmental interventions

+ perthe WHO’ 1986 Ottawa Charter for Health Promotion, there are five key strategies: building healthy
public policies, creating supportive environments, strengthening community action, developing personal
skills, and reorienting health services

Table 5. Disease Prevention vs. Health Promotion Approach
Disease Prevention Health Promotion

Health = absence of disease Health = postive and multidimensional concept
Participatory model of health

‘Aimed atthe population inits total environment

Medical model passive role)

‘Aimed mainly at high-risk groups in the population
‘One-shotstrategy aimed ata specific pathology
Directive and persuasive strategies enforced in target groups
Focused mostly on individuals

Diverse and complementary strategies aimedat anetwork of issues/determinants
Faclitating and enablng approaches y incentives offered tothe population
Focused ona person’shealth status and environment

Ledby professional group rom heath disciplines Led by non-professional organizations, civic groups, local, municipal, regional, and

national governments
‘Source: Shah CP, Public Health and Preventive Medicine in Canada, 5th ed. Toronto: Elsevier, 2003

Healthy Public Policy
* purpose: to create a supportive environment to enable people to lead healthy lives, thereby making healthy
choices easier for citizens
. governments and non-governmental agencies need to consider the cost and acceptability of proposed public
ealth interventions (e.g. more invasive or costly measures should be justified by the extent of beneficial
impacts on people's lives)
+ the Nuffield Intervention Ladder provides one way of ranking the level of intrusion and hence a need for
proportionate benefit of health promotion interventions at a population level
+ methods
= fiscal: imposing additional costs (e.g. taxes on tobacco and alcohol)
= legislative: implementing legal deterrents (e.g. smoking bans, legal alcohol drinking age)
= social: improving health beyond providing universally funded health care (e.g. providing affordable

housing)
‘Source: Intemational Conference on Heath Promotion, Adela, Soth Austra (1998)

Behaviour Change
+ behaviour isa result of three factors
1. predisposing factors: knowledge, attitude, beliefs, values, intentions
2. enabling factors: skills, supports
3. reinforcing factors: HCPs and the social context of family and community
+ health education serves to: increase knowledge and skills and promote healthy behaviours

Health Belief Model (1975)
+ apsychological model that explains and predicts individual short- and long-term health behaviours based
on one’s beliefs and attitudes
+ based on the assumption that one will adopt a beneficial health behaviour if the following three beliefs are
resent:
rp the negative health outcome is avoidable
= expects that the health outcome can be prevented if the recommended health behaviour is adopted
«= the individual can be successful in adopting the health behaviour
+ six concepts:
= four concepts influencing one’s “readiness to act” - perceived susceptibility, perceived severity,
perceived benefits, perceived barriers
= cues to action: stimuli that can trigger health action
« self-efficacy: confidence in one’s ability to take a health action

Stages of Change Model
+ provides a framework in which the Health Belief Model is applied to facilitating behaviour change (e.g.
quitting smoking)

Toronto Notes 2025

‘A Snapshot of the Opioid Crisis in Canada
Canadais experiencing a crisis of opioid-
related overdose and death. Between
January 2016 and September 2019,

there were more than 14700 deaths in
Canada related to opioids. There were
also 19490 hospitalizations and 17000
emergency services. Individuals 25-34
ylo are atthe greatest risk of overdose
death (1 in 6 deaths), but rates have
increased for all adult ages, Deaths are
‘most commonly unintentional, Heroin,
fentanyl, and hydromorphone are most
‘commonly involved. The highest rates of
opioid-related overdose and death are
foundin British Columbia. An estimated
300 per million British Columbians died in
relation to opioid use in 2017, More died
from opioids than homicide, motor vehicle
accidents, and suicide combined. In 2017,
deaths from opioids in Ontario were ~1250,
while deaths from motor vehicle accidents
were ~450, Fentanyl or a fentanyl analogue
were involved in more than 70% of cases,
increased from 55% in 2016.

Sources: J Adc Med, Measuring the Burden of
pic related Mortality in Ontario, Canada, Latest
Trends in Opioié- Related Deaths in Otaria. 1991 to
2015, Toronto: Ontario rug Policy Research Network
Health Canada, March 2018, Opioi-teated harms in
(Canada, Health Canada, March 2020

i)

See Landmark Preventive Medicine Trials
table for more information on the Swedish
Two-County ral, which details the long-
term effect of mammographic screening on
breast cancer mortality

)

Transtheoretical Model Stages of Change for Dietary
and Physical Exercise Modification in Weight Loss
Managementfor Overweight and Obese Adults
Cochrane D8 Syst Rev 201400008066

Purpose: To explore the efficacy of dietary and physical
activity interventions based in the transtheoretical
model of change for sustained weight ss ater one yr
inoverweight or obese adults,

Methods: RCTs comparing the use of weight oss
‘or physical activity intervention grounded inthe
transtheoretcl madelot change to sual care for
eight losin adults who were overweight or obese
were elgbefoindusion Interventions had tobe
cared outby HCPsor trained ly people. Weightloss or
change in BMI was required as an outcome measure
Results: Tree studies inclding a total of 2971
participants were incu ded in thstevew. Interventions
rounded inthis model dd have postive efectson
physical actiity and dietary habits that included
increased exercise duration and frequency reduced fat
intake, and increased frit and vegetable consumption
Theervdence for sustained weightloss atone yr
wasincandasive (mean itferencein favour of the
transtheoretcal madelwas between 2.1kg and0.2
kgat24mo),

