PHI6 Public Health and Preventive Medicine Toronto Notes 2025

Adherence (formerly compliance)
+ degree to which a patient’s behaviour and lifestyle concords with the recommendations of HCPs (e.g. the
extent to which a patient takes medications as directed) NNT
Consult http:/Awww.thennt.com for quick
Coverage ‘summaries of evidence-based medicine
+ extent to which the services rendered cover the potential need for these services ina community (frclodes MNT, Li and risk assessments)
Sources: Shab, CP, Heath indicators and datasources Public Heath and Preventive Medicine in Canada, Se. Toronto: Elsevier, 2003
Thedsscition of Faculties of Medicine of Canada Public Health Educators’ Network. AssesingFridenceand Infomation. AFC Pimer on Population Heath
Qualitative vs. Quantitative
Table 6. Qualitative vs. Quantitative Study Designs @
Qualitative ‘Quantitative
‘Often used to generate hypotheses (Why? What does it mean?) Often tests hypotheses (What? How much/many?) SS SE
“Bottom-up” approach “Top-down” approach PICO
epattern-= . . . . Population/Patient characteristics
Observation pattern tentative hypothesis » theory ‘Theory + hypothesis + observation + confirmation Sc Svacuaa/ SaRSTTNoH toca
‘Sampling approach to obtain representative coverage of ideas, concepts, or Sampling approach to obtain representative coverage of people inthe population Comparison group of control group
experiences Outcome that you are trying to prevent
Narrative: rich, contextual, and detailedinformationfrom a small number of Numeric: frequency, severity, and associations froma large number of participants, or achieve
participants

‘Source: Adapted trom itp/phprimer afm. ca
‘Source: The Assocation of Faculties of Medicine of Canada Public Health Educators’ Network. ASSessing evidence and information, AFMC Primer on Popslation Health

Quantitative Research Methods

(Were exposures assigned by the inestigator? )
- CL»)
Random allocation to groups? Testing a hypothesis?

Co Cr
a -.| =
Controlled Randomized
Designs
I |

Figure 8. Quantitative study designs
Source: adapted tom The ssuciton of actes of Medicine of Canada Pubic Heath Ector Network. AFMCPimeron Population Heathltemet About he primer on population
heath, Availabe hips:pprimeratcale
