PH20 Public Health and Preventive Medicine

+ studies tend to be designed to minimize this type of error since a type I error can have larger clinical
significance than a type II error

+ eg. ina study exploring a drug’s effectiveness on lowering blood pressure, the data may indicate the drug is
effective and therefore lowers blood pressure, when in reality the drug is ineffective

Type II Error (B Error)
+ the null hypothesis is falsely accepted (i.e. stating intervention X is not effective when it is, or declaring an
observed difference/effect to have occurred by chance when it is present)

by convention a higher level of beta error is often accepted for most studies in comparison to alpha error
can also be used to calculate statistical power

e.g. ina study exploring the effectiveness of a COVID-19 vaccine, the data suggests the vaccine is ineffective
and therefore does not protect against COVID-19 infection, when in reality it does

Power

+ probability of correctly rejecting a null hypothesis when itis, in fact, false (i.e. the probability of finding a
specified difference to be statistically significant at a given p-value)

+ power increases with an increase in sample size

* power = 1 - B, and is therefore equal to the probability of a true positive result

Statistical Significance

the probability that the statistical association found between variables is due to random chance alone (i.e.
there is no association)

the preset probability is set sufficiently low that one would act on the result; frequently p<0.05

when statistical tests result in a probability less than the preset limit, the results are said to be statistically
significant (denoted by the a-value)

Clinical Significance

+ measure of clinical usefulness (e.g. 1 mmHg BP reduction may be statistically significant, but may not be
clinically significant)

+ depends on factors such as cost, availability, patient adherence, and side effects in addition to statistical
significance

Confidence Interval (Cl)
+ provides a range of values, bound by the upper and lower confidence limits, that contains the true
opulation parameter (e.g. the mean)
+ frequently reported as 95% Cl (e.g. if this study were repeated 100 times, the 95% confidence interval would
contain the population parameter 95 out of 100 times)

Dat
+ there are 2 types of quantitative data
= continuous data (e.g, height in cm)
= discrete data (e.g. number of patients in the ICU)
+ information collected from a sample of a population
+ there are 4 overall levels of measurement for quantitative data
categorical (e.g. blood type, marital status)
= ordinal (e.g. low, medium, high)
= interval (e.g. °C, time of day)
= ratio (e.g. serum cholesterol, hemoglobin, age)

Validity/Accuracy (of a measurement tool)
+ how closely a measurement reflects the entity it claims to measure

+ how consistent multiple measurements are when the underlying subject of measurement has not changed
+ may be assessed by different observers at the same time (inter-rater reliability) or by the same observer
under different conditions (test-retest reliability)

Internal Validity
+ degree to which the findings of the sample truly represent the findings in the study population
+ dependent on the reliability, accuracy, and absence of other biases

External Validity (ie. Generalizability)
+ degree to which the results of the study can be generalized to other situations or populations

Toronto Notes 2025

Normal Distribution

Negatively Skewed

Figure 11. Distribution curves

Type I (a) Error
“There ls An Effect” where in reality there
is none

‘A wider confidence interval implies more
variance thana tighter confidence interval
sven the same critical value

Good reliability Poor reliability
Good validity Good validity

‘
8
i

Good reliability
Poor validity

Figure 12. Validity vs. reliability

What's the difference between Pearson
and Spearman correlation?

Different types of correlation are used for
different levels of measurement. Pearson is
for continuous and normal data, Spearman
is for ordinal or non-normal data. There are
other forms of correlation for other levels of
‘measurement (e.g. tetrachoric/polychoric)

Poor reliability
Poor validity

