PH3 Public Health and Preventive Medicine

2. health surveillance: monitoring and predicting health outcomes and determinants with systematic,
longitudinal data collection

3. disease and injury prevention: addressing infectious disease through preventive (e.g. vaccination,
clinical infection prevention and control practices such as contact, droplet, airborne precautions)
and control (e.g. quarantine) measures; reducing morbidity through lifestyle improvement

4. population health assessment: studying and engaging with a community to understand their needs
and improve policies and services

5. health promotion: advocating for improved health through broad community and government
measures (e.g. policy, interventions, community organizations)

6. emergency preparedness and response: developing protocols and infrastructure for natural (e.g.
hurricane) and human-made (e.g. opioid crisis) disasters. In many types of health-related disasters,

public health leadsiprovides leadership on the disaster response
‘Sources: Shah CP. Chapter 15 Community Heath Services. Public Health and Preventive Medcinein Canada, Se. Toronto: Esever, 2003

The Association of Faculties of Mecicine of Canada Public Health Educators’ Network. AFMC Primer on Population Health itemet). The organization of health services in Canada; [ited 2006
Mar 25, Avaliable from https:/phprime.afme.cafen!

Legislation and Public Health in Canada

Table 1. Legislation and Public Health in Canada
Federal Provincial
Health Canada Each province has its own Public HealthAct or equivalent (e.g. the Health Potectionand

Provides health services to the Canadian military andveterans
Provides non-insured health benefits (NIHB) to status First Nations peoples
and Inuit, and is responsible for the funding of healthcare services on reserve
Approves new drugs and medical devices
Canada's Food Guide its: #fo0d-guideconado.cale/)
Public Health Agency of Canada nain Government of Canada agency
responsiblfr publichealth)
‘An independent body created post SARSto strengthen pubic health capacity
and response Powers ofthe Local Medical Oficer of Health areoutlinedin the HPPA, spectcally Sec
Focuses on preventing chronic diseases, preventing injuries, and responding 13andSec22
to pubic heath emergencies and infectious disease outbreaks
Activites include CTFPHC guideline secretariat, knowledge brokers
‘verses immigration screening, protects Canadian borders. airport
health inspection)
Liises wit the WHO on global health issues
Canadian Food Inspection Agency
Regulates federal food safety, labeling, and recalls
Deals with animal-related infections
Canadian institutes of Heath Research (CIHR)
Formed in 2000 to support research to improve health andthe healthcare
system

Promotion Actin Ontario) and agencies e.g. Public Heath Ontario)
Designatesthe creationof geographic areas fr the provision of public health services
Gives powers tothe Chief Medical Officer of Health to control pubic healthhazards

hospitals (see dopendir, PA33)
Mandates programs that address public heath issues, environmental health, and
chronic disease prevention

by loca public health unt in Ontario

Specifies diseases to bereported to public health unts by ply sicians, laboratories, and

Ontario Public Health Standards specify the programsand services that must be delivered

Examples of services delivered by municipal/local public health include:

+ infectious disease control, including the follow-up of reported diseases and management of local outbreaks

+ inspection of food premises, including those in hospitals, nursing homes, and restaurants

family health services, including pre-conception, preschool, school-aged, and adult health programs
tobacco control legislation enforcement

assessment and management of local environmental health risks

collection and dissemination of local health status reports

oral health

Determinants of Healt

Concepts of Health

wellness: “state of dynamic physical, mental, social, and spiritual well-being that enables a person to
achieve full potential and have an enjoyable life”

disease: “pathological processes that may or may not produce symptoms and that result in a patient's
illness”

illness: “an individual's experience or subjective perception of a lack of physical or mental well-being and
consequent inability to function normally in social roles”

illness behaviour: an individual’s actions resulting from and responding to their illness, including their
interactions with, or avoidance of, the healthcare system

sickness: views the individual and their society hold towards a health condition, affecting their thoughts
and actions

human being”
handicap: a disadvantage for an individual arising from impairment or disability

«= “limits or prevents the fulfillment of an individual’s normal role as determined by society and depends

on age, sex, social, and cultural factors”

impairment: “any loss or abnormality of psychological, physiological, or anatomical structure or function”
disability: “any restriction or lack of ability to perform an activity within the range considered normal for a

Toronto Notes 2025

Chief Public Health Officer (CPHO) of
Canada

As the federal government's lead public
heath professional, provides advice on
health issues to the Minister of Health and
President of PHAC and collaborates with
other governments, jurisdictions, agencies,
‘organizations, and countries on health
matters

‘Communicates public health information
to health professionals, stakeholders, and
the public

In an emergency, such as an outbreak

or natural disaster, directs PHAC staff,
induding medical professionals, scientists,
and epidemiologists, to coordinate
‘emergency response.

Source: Government of Canada: the role ofthe cet
public healt ofcer internet) Government of Canada;
[updated 2016 Feb 8; cited 2022 July. Avaable rom:
tps canada ca/en/publichealthkorporatl
oxganzationa structure canada-<hie public-health
offcertole-chiet-publichealth-fficer. tml
