PHS Public Health and Preventive Medicine

one group of children received a flour mix not yet approved for sale that caused them to develop anemia,
contributing to greater morbidity and possibly mortality in this group with no therapeutic intervention
+ in an effort to control as many factors as possible, dental care was denied to observe the progression of
dental cavities and gingivitis in the setting of malnutrition

Impact of Sustained Caloric Restriction on Residential School Survivors and Other
Generations

sustained caloric restriction can cause height stunting, induce physiological changes to prioritize fat over
Jean mass, and increased risk of developing type 2 diabetes

stunting negatively impacts neurological, psychological, and immune systems

due to sustained starvation, “the child’s physiology is essentially ‘programmed’ by hunger to continue the
cycle of worsening effects, with their bodies displaying a rapid tendency for fat-mass accumulation when
nutritional resources become available”

other generations are at risk of having a higher BMI and developing obesity

Tuberculosis, Tuberculosis Sanatoriums, and “Indian Hospitals”

European colonizers brought tuberculosis (TB) to Indigenous populations as early as the 1700s. Indigenous
communities, particularly the Inuit, already had risk factors predisposing the spread of TB. For example,
there was malnutrition from food scarcity and overcrowding on federally mandated reserves after forced
relocation from traditional territories. From 1930-1940, death rates from TB in Inuit populations were roughly
700 per 100000, among the highest ever recorded in a human population. For comparison, TB was the tenth
leading cause of death globally in 2016 at a crude death rate of 17 per 100000, while ischemic heart disease was
the first at 126 per 100000. This led the Canadian government to forcibly relocate many Indigenous people to
TB sanatoriums and “Indian hospitals,” often hundreds of kilometres away. The average length of stay at these
institutions was 2.5 years and many patients never returned home.

‘The TB health crisis persists today; in 2016, the average annual incidence rate of TB among the Inuit in
Canada was roughly 296 times higher than Canadian-born non-Indigenous people. In March 2018, the
national representational organization for Inuit people in Canada, called Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami (ITK), and
the Government of Canada committed to reduce TB rates across Inuit communities by 50% by 2025 and to.
eliminate TB by 2030 in a project called the Inuit Tuberculosis Elimination Framework.

It is worth noting that “Indian hospitals” were initially welcomed by many First Nations who were under the

impression that reasonable healthcare was part of treaty terms. In reality, “Indian hospitals” were crowded,

underfunded, and poorly staffed, serving to segregate sick Indigenous people from the rest of the population.

‘They were also the site of the cycle of apprehension, coercive sterilization, chemical and physical restraints,

and scientific experimentation, all of which inflicted significant morbidity and mortality. When the Canadian

government began closing these hospitals in the 1960s, Indigenous people continued to fight for their right to
ealthcare, which was finally recognized in the Indian Health Policy of 1979.

Coerced Sterilizations

Throughout the twentieth century, eugenics programs existed across the country. In the 1920s-1930s, both
Alberta and British Columbia legalized eugenic policies in the Sexual Sterilization Acts which were not
repealed until the 1970s. To limit reproduction of “unfit” people in the eyes of the government, Indigenous
women were disproportionately targeted. This is referred to as forced or coerced sterilization and, according
to various accounts by Indigenous women across the country, involved any number of the following:

+ tubal ligations being performed without consent

+ being falsely told that a procedure is reversible

+ being pressured into signing consent forms while actively in labour or on operating tables

+ being given an ultimatum to undergo a tubal ligation or risk child apprehension

It is important to note that many sterilizations also occurred outside legislation, in federally run “Indian
hospitals,” and some have been documented as recently as 2019. At least 100 Indigenous women have come
forward with accounts of coerced sterilization by physicians and nurses, spanning from the 1970s until 2019.

Sixties Scoop and Indigenous Child Welfare

‘The “Sixties Scoop” (Johnson, 1983) (1951-1980s) refers to the government-mandated practice of removing
Indigenous children from their families without consent for placement in foster care or adoption. As
residential schools started to close, many children were transitioned to child welfare facilities as the state
deemed Indigenous parents unfit to care for their children — a legacy that persists today. Similar to the Indian
Residential School system, the goal was to assimilate Indigenous children into a non-Indigenous family, rather
than to directly provide child welfare to Indigenous communities. Though Indigenous bands have increasingly
been allowed to provide their own child welfare, Indigenous children are still overrepresented in foster care.
In 2016, Indigenous youth ages 0 to 4 made up about half of all foster children in private households, despite
being only 8% of total youth in this age group in Canada. Youth with a history in government care may be at
greater risk for substance misuse, street involvement, and incarceration.

To this day, Indigenous children are disproportionately represented in the child welfare system and are often
apprehended for reasons directly related to the routine conditions of poverty. The apprehensions that continue
today echo the practices of the Sixties Scoop and residential school eras; the displacement of Indigenous
children separates them from their language and culture and hinders the ability of Indigenous families to
build resilience. Importantly, many Indigenous mothers and families avoid accessing healthcare services for
fear of their children being apprehended.

Toronto Notes 2025

ribing
Consider social prescribing: a holistic
approach which involves the integration,
referral to, and collaboration between
social and medical services. Promotes
health and wellbeing by connecting
individuals to their community

A framework for building primary
‘are capacity to address the social
determinants of health

InToronto, the St Michael's Hospital
Academic Family Health Team developed
the SDOH Committee to analyze how
socal factors affect patients and support
the development and implementation of
interventions. Informed by this work and
existing literature, a conceptual framework
was developed to demonstrate how
primary care organizations can intervene
in SDOH:

4. Collect data to identify “upstream”
causes of downstream problems

2 Use the data to change the care
provided to individuals and in practice
management

3. Use your data to drive change at the
‘organizational level

4, Use your data and experience to inform
system evolution

5, Use your data and experience to create
2 foundation for “upstream” advocacy

‘Source: Pinto, A.D. and Bloch 6. Framework for

‘building primary care capacity toaddress the social

determinants of health. Canadian Family Physician,

‘2017, 63 (11) 0476-482
