PHO Public Health and Preventive Medicine Toronto Notes 2025
Disease Prevention Strategies
+ measures aimed at preventing the occurrence, interrupting through early detection and treatment, or

slowing the progression of disease/ mitigating the sequelae Dees Etience Stern! Stperrised

Table 3. Levels of Disease Prevention

Level of Prevention Goal

Examples

Primordial

Preventing the development ofriskfactors

Educationthat begins inchildhood about behaviour that can harm health
Progamsthat encourage physical activity

Injection Sites
Can Fam Physician 2017;63(19:866
Giinical question: Do supervised
injection sites (SISs) reduce mortality,
hospitalizations, ambulance calls, or
disease transmission?

Bottom line: The best evidence from

Primary Protecthealth and preventdisease onset Immunization programs (e.g. measles, diphtheria, pertussis, tetanus, polio, cohort and modelling studies suggests that

Reducing exposure to risk factors see Pediatrics, PS) ‘SISs are associated with lower overdose
Smoking cessation ‘mortality (88 fewer overdose deaths per
Seatbelt use 100000 person-years (PYs)), 67% fewer
See Landmark Preventive Medicine Trials, PH34for more informat ambulance calls for treating overdoses,
‘VAXICOL, which details the impact of influenza vaccination of nursinghome anda decrease in HIV infections. Effects on
staff on mortality of residents hospitalizations are unknown,

Secondary Early detection of subclinical) disease to minimize Mammography
morbidity and mortality Routine Pap smears

FAT (ws FOBT vs. colonoscopy)

Tertiary Treatment and rehabiltation of diseaseto prevent DM monitoringwith HbA, eye exams, fotexams Smoking Cessation VoingComparedwith
progression, permanent dsabiity,andfuture Medication to manage chronic conditions TadtionalWicotine Replacement Therapies:2
clsease Systematic Review andMeta analysis

‘Source: Basic Concepts in Prevention, Suvellance, and Health Promotion. AFMC Primer on Popalation Heath ip/paprimeratmc.aPartt TheoryiakingAbo Health BMJ Open 2021 11:e044222

‘ChaplerBasicConceptsinPreventionSureilancelndHealtPromationThestagesatpevention Pooled resis fomsix randomized contoled

talented no dierence in smoking cessation,

Screening (Secondary Prevention) the proportion of participants reducing smoking

consumption, mean eductionin cigarettes smoked per
day, harms, between e-gaetesand traditional
niotinerplacement therapy. Mast studies were

+ “screening isa strategy used in a population to identify the possible presence of an as-yet-undiagnosed
disease in individuals without signs or symptoms”

= screening vs. case finding: screening tests are not diagnostic tests Judged tohave a high risk of bias, resuingn the
= the primary purpose of screening tests is to detect early disease or risk factors for disease in large or het pteeriereetlaarey
numbers of apparently healthy individuals. The purpose ofa diagnostic test isto establish the presence _Payeinfeaquesmamupeersas to

(or absence) of disease as a basis for treatment decisions in symptomatic or screen positive individuals
(confirmatory test). Both screening and case finding seek to risk stratify for further investigation
= to minimize biases and harms, and maximize benefits, screening is best done at the population level,
not the individual clinical level, as part of a screening program (e.g. provincial breast cancer screening
program vs. screening by primary care/family physicians)
+ types of screening
= universal screening: screening all members of a population for a disease (e.g. phenylketonuria (PKU)
and hypothyroidism in all newborns)
= selective screening: screening of targeted subgroups of the population at risk for a disease (e.g.
mammography in women >50 yr)
= multiphasic screening: the use of many measurements and investigations to look for many disease
entities (e.g, periodic health exam)
+ types of bias in screening
= lead-time bias; overestimation of survival time ‘from diagnosis’ when the estimate is made from
the time of screening, instead of the later time when the disease would have been diagnosed without
screenins
. length-time bias: overestimation of the survival time due to screening at one time point including
more stable cases than aggressive cases of disease, which may have shorter survival times

Occult Overt
Disease Disease
Onset of Disease Death from Disease
Lead Time
Screen Detected Clinically Detected

Figure 2. Lead-time bias
