PH25
Steps to Control an Outbreak

Table 10. Ten-Step Approach

Public Health and Preventive Medicine

Steps

Details

1. Identity the investigation team and resources

2. Establish existence of an outbreak

13. Verify the diagnosis

4. Definea case

5, Find cases systemically and create aline ist

6, Perform descriptive epidemiology and develop hypotheses

7. Evaluate hypotheses and conduct additional studies as needed

8, Implement control measures
9. Communicate findings

10. Continue surveillance

Local public health units (e.g Toronto Public Health)
Provincial level e.g. Pubic Health Ontario, Ministry of Health)

Federallevel (e.g. PHAC)

Compare the observed number of cases during the suspected outbreak tothe expected
umber of cases expected during a non-cutbreak time frame

(€.g-receivinga report of a vomiting baseball teamaftera team dimer a a restaurant)

Obtain medical recordsand lab reports
Conduct further clinical testing as needed

3 components: Person, Place, Time (¢.9. “Confirmed case: Person with XYZsigns and
symptoms...withtestresult ABC...ccurred after visiting location LM... during months!
year’)

Conduct passive andlor active surveillance for new cases

‘ine list should include cinical information (signs/symptoms, onset timesidates,
‘demographic infomation, andexposure informationfor eachcase

Conduct analysis to describe cases (Person, Pace, Time)
Create epidemic curves (see Figure'16)
Case-control studies: useful when not everyone exposed canbe foundand included in

the study
Cohort studies: useful when all persons exposed canbe induded inthe study

Can occur at any stagein anouthreak e.g. isolation, vacination of susceptible persons)

‘ert HCPs to recognize signs andsymptomsand order relevant dagnostictestsif anew
caseis suspected

Involve the mediato address public concerns and cal for publicacton (e.g. get
vaccinated)

Determine when the outbreakis over
Document the effectiveness of control measures

‘Source: Adapted from Moore Outbreak Investigations: The 10-Step Approach [Intemet. North Carolina: Goverment of Worth Carona; (updated 2019 Dec 16; cited 2020 Jun 20). Available

‘rom: tpssep.dph.ncs. gov

Communicable Disease Control Targets

+ interventions should target host, agent, environment, and their interactions

host
age, immune
response,
susceptibility

DISEASE

environment
climate, physical
structures, population
density

agent
virulence, toxicity,
ability to survive
outside body

nutrition, rs
sickle cell trait >
antimalarials, 5
proper nutrition :
/ \ educate,
Deer avoid exposed
> Z_ skin at dusk
MALARIA
Plasmodium remove stagnant tropical,
falciparum — ‘water sources. Stagnant water
eradicate, ‘mosquito netting on homes
genetically modity

Figure 17. Epidemiology triad as framework for infection control interventions: practical example using malaria

Infection Prevention and Control

+ Infection Prevention and Control (IPAC) refers to evidence-based practices and procedures that,
when applied consistently in health care settings, can prevent or reduce the risk of transmission of
microorganisms to HCPs, clients, patients, residents and visitors

Routine Practices

+ the system of IPAC practices recommended by the Public Health Agency of Canada to be used with all
clients/patients/residents during all care to prevent and control transmission of microorganisms in all

health care settings

+ basic elements include: risk assessment, hand hygiene, personal protective equipment, environmental
controls (e.g. cleaning, placement, engineering controls), administrative controls (e.g. policies and
procedures, staff education, monitoring of compliance with feedback)

Toronto Notes 2025

Figure 16. Epidemic curves

‘Number of Cases

Day of Onset,

Figure 16a. Poiont source epidemic
curve

THTTITIT Hhee ae

Day of Onset

Figure 16b. Continuous source
epidemic curve

Day of Onset

Figure 16c. Propagated source
epidemic curve
