PHI3 Public Health and Preventive Medicine

+ standardization prevents bias that can occur when crude rates from two dissimilar populations are
compared (e.g. crude death rates over a number of decades are not comparable as the population age
distribution has changed with time)

this allows for the calculation of a Standardized Mortality Ratio (SMR), where SMR = (observed number of
deaths)/(expected number of deaths)

MEASURES OF MORTALITY

Life Expectancy
+ the expected number of years to be lived by a newborn based on age-specific mortality rates at a selected
time

Crude Death Rate
+ mortality from all causes of death per 1000 in the population

Infant Mortality Rate (IMR)
+ number of reported deaths among children <1 yr of age during a given time period divided by the number
of reported live births during the same time period and expressed as per 1000 live births per year

Maternal Mortality Rate (MMR)
+ number of deaths of women during pregnancy and due to puerperal causes per 1000 live births in the same
year

MEASURES OF DISEASE BURDEN

Potential Years of Life Lost (PYLL)

. calculated for a population using the difference between the actual age at death and a standard/expected
age at deat

+ increased weighting of mortality at a younger age

Disability Adjusted Life Year (DALY)
+ number of years lost due to premature mortality + number of years lost due to disability, where 0 = a year of
erfect health and 1 = death
+ both premature death and time spent with disability accounted for; these disabilities can be physical or
mental
+ used to assess burden of diseases in a population

Quality Adjusted Life Year (QALY)
+ years of life weighted by quality (utility is a proxy for quality), ranging from 0 (= death) to 1 (= perfect
ealth). Weights are assigned based on large studies that assessed the effect of various conditions on quality
of life (e.g. blindness = 0.3)
+ itis possible to have “states worse than death” (e.g. QALY <0 for extremely serious conditions)
+ usually used as an economic measure to assess the value for money of medical interventions

For additional rate calculations see Steps to Control an Outbreak, PH25

Consult the Public Health Agency of Canada for examples and latest statistics

‘overnmentof Canada: Chapter 3: Te chit pubic eal ofice'seprt on he state of public heath in Canada 2008 - or health Interet]. Our population, ourheath andthe dstbutions
‘of ur health; updated 2008 Jun 6. vaabl rom: ips: wr. canada ca/n/pub i heatcorporate/pblcationschie-pabiheah-oficer-reports-tae-public heath canada Report
‘on-stte-pbiichelth-canada-2008/captet 3.

‘Sources: Sah, CP. Healthindcatrs and datasources, Pubic Heath and Preventive Medicine in Canada, Se. Toronto: Eee, 2003

Thedssocaton of Faculties of Medicine of Canada Public Health Educators’ Network. AFC primer on population heath interne). Methods: measuring heathy ted 2006 Mar 25) Avalable
‘ramntips:phprimeratnecafen!

pidemiology

Population
+ adefined collection of individuals/regions/institutions/etc. (e.g. individuals defined by geographic region,
sex, age)

Sample
+ aselection of individuals from a population
+ types
= Probability sampling
+ simple random: all individuals are have a known and equal chance of being selected
« systematic random: a rule or algorithm is used to select a subset of individuals (e.g. every third
person on alist)
* stratified random: population is divided into distinct subgroups (e.g. age groups), individuals are
randomly selected from within each subgroup
+ cluster: a group of persons clustered in space/time (e.g. all persons living ina city block) is selected
rather than an individual
+ Non-probability sampling
* convenience: sampling based on convenience or accessibility (e.g. persons attending a booth at a
health fair)
+ snowball sampling: existing subjects nominate subjects they know, so the sample increases in size
like a rolling snowball; useful for recruiting members of “hidden” populations (e.g. persons who
inject drugs)

Toronto Notes 2025

Top 10 Causes of DALYs in Canada, 2019
Neoplasms

Cardiovascular diseases

Musculoskeletal disorders

Neurological disorders

Mental disorders

Other non-communicabl diseases
‘Unintentional injuries

Chronicrespiratory diseases

Diabetes and kidney diseases

10, Substance usedisoders

Source: Global Burden of Disease Compare Vi Hub
[Ierne) Seattle WA: University of Washington,
Institute for Heath Metrics an Evaluation (ME);
2021|cted 2021 Mar 28) Avaabe rom: ts:
veh. eathdaa.org/gb<ompare!

SPIN: use a SPecifictest torule IN a
hypothesis. Note that specific tests have
very few false positives. ryougeta
positive test, its likely atrue positive
SNOUT: use a SENsitive testto rule OUT
a hypothesis, Note that sensitive tests
have very few false negatives. Ifyou get a
negative test, itis likely a true negative
