PH4 Public Health and Preventive Medicine

+ health equity: when all people have “the opportunity to attain their full health potential” and no one is
“disadvantaged from achieving this potential because of their social position or other socially determined.
circumstance.” Health inequities are systematic differences in the health of individuals/groups which are
considered unjust

+ health equality: defined as where populations have equal or similar health status. Health inequalities are
systematic differences in the health of groups that do not necessarily carry a moral judgement

+ health intersectionality: refers to the concept that an individual's various social identities (e.g.
race, weight, sex, class, ability etc.) can combine and overlap to create unique experiences of health
discrimination and/or privilege.

+ health stigma: refers to the reduction of a person’s identity to negative stereotypes about their health status

(e.g. weight stigma). Stigma may limit patient trust, healthcare quality, and accessibility
soute ctr homos Sere pester oon Imprmen Osby, anno stent state ot an Serves: 21 ete 2020
‘Apr 28),Avabl fom: iis cc edu sg/eninpaiment-isablity-andhandiap-whals-the-ierence!

Determinants of Health

+ 1974: the Honourable Marc Lalonde, federal Minister of Health, publishes A New Perspective on the Health
of Canadians which outlines four factors that determine health: “human biology, environment, lifestyle,
and health care organizations.” The idea of determinants of health has since been expanded and refined to
include many additional factors

* 2023: per the WHO, the SDOH are “non-medical factors that influence health outcomes”, including “the
conditions in which people are born, grow, work, live, and age, and the wider set of forces and systems

shaping the conditions of daily life”

Sources: ‘Concepts, Determinants, and Promotion o Health. Pubic Health and Preventive Medicine in Canada, Se. Toronto: Esevir, 2003

The Assocation of Faculties of Medicine of Canada Public Health Educators’ Network. AFMC primer on popalation healt [nternet.Chapter1, Concepts of health and ness ted Jul 2022}
{about 7p. Availabletrom htps/phprimer afmc.caen/pat-ichapter-

‘World Healt Organization: Heath topics [internet Social Determinants of Health cited Jun 2023} Avilable frome htps/wrw.ho int/heath-topics!socal-determinants-f-
heatthétabtab 1

Water and
sanitation

General ‘Unemployment

Living and working

conditions conditions

Social and community
‘Work environment

Education

Agriculture and
food production

© Cassandra Cetin 2015,

Figure 1. Population health model
‘Mapled rom Dahigreen 6, Whitehead M. European strategies or tackling social negltiesin heath: Leveling up Pat 2. World Health Organization, 2006

+ cultural humility: an approach to health care based on humble acknowledgement of oneself asa learner
when it comes to understanding a person's experience. This is a life-long process of learning and being self-
reflexive

+ cultural safety:

= developed by Dr. Irihapeti Ramsden, a Maori nurse scientist, in the 1980s and is “concerned with
the power relationships between nurses and those in their care. The recipients of nursing care are
empowered to decide what is culturally safe rather than complying passively with the authority of
nurses or other health professionals” - Cancer Australia

= “an approach that considers how social and historical contexts, as well as structural and interpersonal
power imbalances, shape health and health care experiences. Practitioners are self-reflective/self-aware
with regards to their position of power and the impact of this role in relation to patients” - HeretoHelp
British Columbia

+ cultural awareness: an attitude that includes awareness about differences between cultures

+ cultural sensitivity: an attitude that recognizes the differences between cultures and that these differences
are important to acknowledge i in health care

+ cultural competency: an approach that focuses on practitioners’ attaining skills, knowledge, and attitudes
to workin more effective and respectful ways with people of different cultures, including Indigenous
peoples

Toronto Notes 2025

Medical Officer of Health (MOH) (Ontario)
May be called “Medical Health Officer”
(MHO) in other provinces
Appointed to each public heath unit by the
board of health
Position held by a Public Health and
Preventive Medicine specialist physician
Responsibilities indude oversight of a
‘multidsciplinary team who:
Collect and analyze epidemiological
data

Conduct health surveillance

Implement health programs, including
tobacco use prevention inspections
(restaurants, physician's offices, tattoo
parlors) and prenatal courses

The MOH, by law, canrequire an indvidualpremise!

agency totake or fefrain rom any ation due toa

public health hazard (Section 13 and 2 ofthe Heath

Protection ond Promotion At)

Determinants of Health

Income and social status

Employment and working conditions
Education and literacy

Childhood experiences

Physical environments

Social supports and coping skils
Heath-related behaviours

‘Access to health services

Biology and genetic endowment
Gender

Culture

Exposure to colonization and racialized
prejudice

Racism

Source: Socal determinants of heath and heath
inequalties[nteret. Government of Canada;
Imoitied 2022 June 14; ted June 2022} Available
fromtpswwn.canada.cafen/public heath)
Servcesheath-promotiopopuatio- heath wtat-
determines health. html

Ottawa Charter for Health Promotion
(1986)

Health promotion: the process of enabling
people to increase control over, and
improve their health

‘Some health promotion can be achieved
through dinical interactions with patients,
but most health promotion is done at

the population level by public health
professionals and agencies through
engaging stakeholders, formulating policy,
and influencing upstream factors

The Ottawa Charteris a framework for
thinking about health promotion

The Ottawa Charter states that
governments and health care providers
should be involved in a health promotion
process that includes:

4. Building healthy public policy

2 Creating supportive environments

3. Strengthening community action

4, Developing personal skills

5. Re-orienting health services
