PHI7 Public Health and Preventive Medicine

Observational Study Designs

+ observational studies involve neither the manipulation of the exposure of interest nor randomization of the
study participants
+ there are two main subtypes of observational studies: descriptive and analytic studies

Descriptive Studies

+ describe the events and rates of disease with respect to person, place, and time; estimates disease frequency
and time trends

+ includes case reports, on one person or event, or a case series, which assesses exposures and outcomes

+ can be used to generate an etiologic hypothesis and for policy planning

Analytic Studies
+ observational studies used to test a specific hypothesis
+ includes ecological studies, cohort studies, case-control studies, and cross-sectional studies

Table 7. Observational Study Designs

TypeotStudy Ecological Cross-Sectional Case-Control Cohort
Definition Units of analysis are Useindividval data on Samplesa group ofpeople who Subjectsare sampled and, asa goup,
populations or groups ‘exposuresand outcomes _—alreadyhavea particular outcome classified onthebasis of presence or
‘of people, rather than gathered atthe sametime (cases) and comparesthemtoa absence of exposure toa particular risk
individuals similar sample groupwithout that factor
‘outcome (controls
Subjects Aggregatedgroups (e.g. Sampleof a population Two ormore samples of individuals Oneor more cohorts
cites) with and without the outcome(s) of Cohort: group of people with common
interest(i.e. cases and contrls) characteristics (eg. year of bith, region
of residence)
Divided into measured exposed vs.
unexposed groups
Methods Descriptions ofthe average Collectinformation from each Select sample of casesof aspecific Collect information on factors from all
fexposureor iskof disease personatone particular time disease during aspectic time frame persons at thebeginningofthestudy
fora population Tabulatethe numbers in Representaiveof spectrum of Subjectsare followed for a specticperiod of
Canuseregressionmodels —groups(e.g.bypresence or dinica disease time todetermine development of disease in
totestassociationsbetween absenceof diseasefactorof Select control(s) each exposure group
area-level predictors and intrest) Representthegeneral population Prospective: measuring from the exposureat
‘aggregate outcomes Maketables and compare Tominimizeriskof bias, may select _presentto the future outcomes
‘groups rmorethan onecontrol group and! Retrospective: measuring forward in time
Estimate prevalence cmatchcontrolstocases e.g. from exposures inthe past o later outcomes,
Useregression models to age, gender). Usestaistal models to test associations
testassociationsbetween Assess past exposures e.g. EMR, between exposures and disease or other
predictorsand outcomes of questionnaire) measured outcomes
interest Association canbe concluded Provides estimates of incidence, relative
between the riskfactorand the risk, attributable risk
‘disease (odds ratio)
Advantages Quick, easy todo Determines association Otten used when diseasein Shows anassociation between isk factor(s
Uses readily available data between variables, population israre (ss than 10% and outcome(s)
Generates hypothesis ‘Quick and uses fewer ‘of population) due to increased Stronger evidence for causation
resources effidency or when timeto develop Can considera variety of exposures and
‘Surveys with validated dseaseislong outcomes
‘questionsallowscomparison Less costly and time consuming
between studies
Disadvantages Poor generalizabltyto ——_—Doesnotallow for Recall bias Confounding may occur due to individuals
individual level not direct assessmentof temporal see Bios, Pits) self selecting the exposure, or unknown!
assessmentof causal relationship orofferstrong Confounding unmeasuredfactors are associate withthe
relationship) evidence for causation Selectionbiasforcases andcontrols measured exposure and outcome
Ecological fallacy: an between variables Only one outcome can bemeasured Cost and duration oftime needed to follw
incorrectinferencefrom Confounding cohort
‘groups to individuals Selection bias Selection bias
Confounding Recal bias
(see Bas, PH)
Examples study lookingat the study that examines the _Afamous case control study ‘Mamas cohort study is the Framingham

association between smoking distribution of BI by age in
rates and lung cancer rates Ontario ata particular point
indifferent countriesat the intime
population level without

individval dataon both

factors

‘Sources: Shah CP. Measurement and investigation. Pubic Heath and Preventive Medicine in Canada, Se. Toronto: Elsevier, 2003.
‘The Asociation of Faculties of Medicine of Canada Public Health Educators’ Network. AFMC primer on population heath [Interne]. Assessing evidence and information. Available rom
‘tts: /pnprimer, afm. ca/en/part-ichapter-51

Rothman KJ Greenland S6, Lash TL. Modern epidemiology, 3e Philadelphia: Wolters Knwer, 2012.

Heart Study, which assessed the long-term
cardiovascular isksof diet, exercise, and
tobaccosmokingexposure and lung medicationssuchas ASA, etc.

‘cancer cases atthe individual evel

Toronto Notes 2025

An ecological fallacy is an erroneous
conclusion made when extrapolating
population level data to explain
phenomena occurring in individuals. An
‘example of an ecological fallacy would be
concluding that red wine drinking leads

to lower risk of death from CVS disease
based on an ecological study showing that
countries with a higher rate of red wine
consumption have a lower rate of death
from CVS causes

