PH21 Public Health and Preventive Medicine Toronto Notes 2025
Common Statistical Tests

Table 8. Statistical Tests

TwoSampleZTest —_AnalysisofVariance Chi-Squared Test (12) Linear Regression Logistic Regression Pearson Product-Moment Correlation (Pearson's,
(ANOVA) 0
What are youtrying to show?
‘Compare the mean Comparethe mean _—‘Testsiftwocategorical variables are Modelrelationship ‘Model relationship Assesses the strength ofthe linear relationship
values of an outcome _valuesofanautcome independent ornot e.g.association between continuous between: between two variables. Ranges from-t (perfect
variablebetween two variable betweentwo _betweenfanily history of breast variable and one or more negative association, increases in one variableare
‘groups(eg. difference in ormore groups(e.g. cancer and having breast cancer) explanatory variables associated with decreases inanother to1 (perfect

average BPbetweenmen difference inaverage positive association, increases in one variable
‘and women) BP between persons in a iated with increases in the other). A
‘three towns) correlation of Oindicates no relationship
‘What kind of variables do you measure?
Dependent Continuous Continuous Categorical (2 or more)/ordinal Continuous Categorical (outcomes Continuous
Variable usually dichotomous)
Independent Dichotomous Categorical/Ordinal (2 Categorical/Ordinal (2 or more) Continuous/Ordinal/ Continuows/Ordinal/ Continuous
Variable ‘or more) Categorical Categorical
Assumptions: Data follow a normal/t- Normal distribution of Expected countsmustbe at least Sfor Dependentvariable’s Linearity (on logit scale) Underlying relationshipis linear
distribution dependent variable’s: allcells inn by ntable error term has normal. No influential values Data for both variables are normally distributed
Equal variances ‘error term Dataare independent distribution Model has adequate Data are independent
Data areindependent Data are independent Linear relationship goodness-of-fit
between variables, Data are independent
Homoscedasticity
Causation

Criteria for Causation (Bradford Hill Criteria)

1. strength of association: the frequency with which the factor is found in the disease and the frequency with
which it occurs in the absence of disease

. consistency: is the same relationship seen with different populations or study design?

. specificity: is the association particular to your intervention and measured outcome?

. temporal relationship: did the exposure occur before the onset of the disease?

. biological gradient: finding a dose-response relationship between the exposure-outcome

. biological plausibility: does the association/causation make biological sense?
coherence: can the relationship be explained/accounted for based on what we know about science, logic,
etc.?

8. experimental evidence: does experimental evidence support the association (e.g. is there improvement?)

9. analogy: do other established associations provide a model for this type of the relationship?

Note: Not all criteria must be fulfilled to establish scientific causation, and the modern practice of EBM

emphasizes ‘experimental evidence’ as superior to other criteria for experimental causation review. However,

many causation questions in health cannot be answered with experimental methods
‘Source: Bradford Hill A. The environment and disease: association or causation. Proc R Soc Med 1965; 58{'5):2s

NQVawD

Assessing Evidence

+ critical appraisal is the process of systematically examining research evidence to assess validity, results,
and relevance before using it to inform a decision

FILTERED
INFORMATION
CCritically-Appraised Individual
ov Articles (Article Synopses)
Randomized Controlled Trials
UNFILTERED
— INFORMATION
‘Case-Controlled Studies
‘Case Series / Reports _I

Background Information / Expert Opinion

Figure 13. Pyramid of pre-appraised evidence
‘© Capyright 2006. Tustees of Dartnoth Clee & Yale Univers Al ightseserved. Produced byGbver J, tz0D, OfatoK.,ané Wang
