PH7 Public Health and Preventive Medicine

Indigenous Health in Canada

+ in 2021, more than 1.8 million people in Canada self-identify as Indigenous, representing approximately 5%
of the total population
+ 3 distinct groups of Indigenous peoples in Canada (per sec. 35 of the Constitution Act 1982): First Nations
(status and non-status), Métis, and Inuit
= First Nations: includes over 600 diverse communities in Canada; status vs. non-status refers to
the registration of First Nations peoples under the Indian Act (1876), which, in addition to the
establishment of the Department of Indian Affairs, was originally established by the government to
administer/manage Treaty commitments, and to remove self-governing and traditional practice rights.
The Indian Act impacts the lives of countless Indigenous peoples, families, and communities from birth
todeath
Métis: descendants of the First Nations and European settlers; nearly 2/3 residing in cities, greatest
proportion in Ontario and the prairie provinces
Inuit: roughly 75% of this population of 70000 resides in the 4 Canadian Regions known as Inuit
Nunangat, the Inuit Homeland. These include: Nunavut, Nunavik (Northern Quebec), Nunatsiavut
(Labrador), and Inuvialuit (Northwest Territories). The majority of Inuit live in Nunavut (30135),
followed by Nunavik (11800), Inuvialuit (3110), and Nunatsiavut (2285). Another 17690 Inuit live
outside of Inuit Nunangat, many in urban centres in southern Canada, including Ottawa, Edmonton,
and Montréal

Young and Growing Populations

+ between 2016-2021, the number of Indigenous peoples increased by 9.4%, making them the fastest growing
population in Canada

. about 28% of Indigenous peoples were under the age of 25 in 2021, making them the youngest population in
Canada

Colonization and Healthcare

Colonizers have perpetrated specific acts throughout Canadian history that have greatly impacted the
physical, mental, emotional, and spiritual health of Indigenous peoples. Physicians should therefore be
aware of the historical (and current) underpinnings of Indigenous health disparities, and the way in which
HCPs, including physicians, have acted as agents of the colonial agenda historically, which are discussed
here, and their responsibility to redress previously damaged healthcare relationships (see Ethical, Legal,
and Organizational Medicine, Resources in Indigenous Health, ELOM30). Despite institutionalized abuse
and assimilation, Indigenous people have survived remarkable injustice and have built resilience through
traditional knowledge and practices.

Residential Schools (1870s-1996)

‘The residential school era is well-known for its lasting and damaging effects on many generations of
Indigenous people. Many Indigenous students suffered from poor nutrition, hygiene, and living conditions, as
well as physical, sexual, and psychological abuse from teachers and others in power. The intent of residential
schools to assimilate Indigenous people also led to spiritual harms through significant loss of traditional
language and culture. Residential school survivors report poorer general and self-rated health as well as
increased rates of chronic and infectious diseases, mental distress, depression, substance use, and suicide.
Importantly, many of these outcomes extend to subsequent generations (i.e. intergenerational trauma).

‘The term “residential school syndrome” has been proposed to better characterize the traditional DSM-V
definition of post-traumatic stress disorder with additional criteria specific to residential school survivors,
such as tendency to misuse alcohol and drugs (often at a young age), loss of cultural knowledge, violent or
angry outbursts, and difficulty parenting. Treatment approaches must take into account a holistic view of all
these criteria, rather than simply focusing on one aspect, like substance use, which often perpetuates negative
stereotypes.

‘The Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC) Final Report (2015) is a document jointly created by the
Canadian government and residential school survivors that preserves in writing the truth of residential
schools and delineates recommendations for reconciliation. Within this report are 94 Calls to Action, some of
which are directed to HCPs and medical schools. Physicians have a responsibility to respond to the TRC Calls
to Action and play an important role in reconciliation with Indigenous peoples.

Nutrition Trials

From 1942 to 1952, nutritional scientists in conjunction with the Canadian government performed unethical
research on Indigenous people with the aim of “studying the state of nutrition of the Indian.” The James

Bay Survey is perhaps the most well-known of these studies conducted on the Attawapiskat and Rupert’s
House Cree First Nations, though many were conducted on children in residential schools as well. One of the
lead physician-scientists was Dr. Frederick Tisdall (inventor of Pablum), former president of the Canadian
Paediatric Society and pediatrician at the Hospital for Sick Children in Toronto, Ontario. Some unethical and
arguably criminal acts committed by researchers were:

+ lack of informed consent from parents or children

+ Indigenous children were kept malnourished over a two-year period to establish a baseline

Toronto Notes 2025

‘New Immigrants to Canada

Mandatory medical exams on entry
to Canada by a designated medical
practitioner

Complete medical examination for persons
ofall ages

Chest x-ray and report for persons 211 yr
Urinalysis for persons 25 yr

Syphilis serology for persons >15 yr

HIV testing for applicants 215 yr, as well

as for those children who have received
blood or blood products, have a known
HIV-positive mother, or have an identified

risk. An ELISA HIV screening test should be
done for HIV fand HIV 2

‘Serum creatinine for persons 215 yr, and
children with a history of HTN (resting BP
>150/90 mmHg), DM, kidney disease, or
signs of impaired renal function

Provide compassionate psychosocial
assessment, be aware of increased
prevalence of mental health issues (e.g.
PTSD, depression, intimate partner
Violence)

Assess immunization documents and
develop catch-up schedule

‘Source: Citizenship and Immigration Canada Handbook
Its:une.caada.cen/mmigration etugees-
<tizenshiporporate publications manuals. tm

Traditional and Complementary Medicine Use
‘Among Indigenous CancerPatientsin Australia,
Canada, New Zealand, andthe UnitedStates:A
SystematicReview

Integr Cancer The 201873: 68-581

Purpose: Tosystematicaly review the use of traditional
Indigenous nd complementary medicines among
Indigenous cancer patients in Australia, Canada, New
Teaand, andthe United Sates.

Methods: Studies on the se of traditional Indigenous
and complementary medicines among Indigenous
cancer patientin astra, Canada, New Zealand and
the United Sates published between January2000and
October 2017 were eligible forindusion.

Resuts: 2 artiesbased on 8 studies were induded.
Traditional ndigenous and complementary medicines
were used between 1910 577%of Indigenous
patients. These modalities weremost often used in
‘combination with conventional cancer treatments to
‘meet spiritual, emotional, and cultural needs. These
treatments had multiple perceived spiritual, emotional,
and cultural benefits. Traditional Indigenous a
complementary medicine usewas influenced bya

patient's perceptions of ther healthcare practitioner's
attitudes towards the se modalities.

In Canada, many Indigenous healing
practices include drumming, singing,
‘smudging, herbal teas, sweat lodges, and
other ceremonies. Healthcare providers are
encouraged to research and explore these
‘options as an additional therapeutic tool
for Indigenous patients requesting them.
Not all Indigenous patients will request
such treatments and so perhaps first ask
patients, "What do I need to know about
youasa person to give you the best care
possible?”
