PHI2 Public Health and Preventive Medicine

1. Precontemplation: the individual is not seriously considering change
(for various reasons) and is not interested in any kind of intervention

2. Contemplation: the individual begins to seriously consider making
the change within the foreseeable future (often defined as six
months)
Relapse:
1 possible

3. Preparation: the individual begins experimenting, making

small changes; he or she resolves tomake a serious attempt. F-~  —‘w atany
in the future (usually defined as 30 days) SF stage
wi
4. Action: the individual is actively involved in making ™
the change, using different techniques Bo,
ve
5. Maintenance: the individual must learn to a
iccessfully cope with temptations to return.“

to the previous behaviour pattern

Figure 3. Stages of change model
Source: Pochasta 0, icement CC, and orcas. Inseachot how people change. Aplications to dice Behavious. Am Psyhel 9824211021118

Risk Reduction Strategies
+ risk reduction: lower the risk to health without eliminating it (e.g. avoiding sun to lower risk of skin cancer)
+ harm reduction: a set of strategies aimed to reduce the negative consequences of drug use and other risky

behaviours (e.g. needle exchange programs)
Souc: Sha? ane deeming Pootond lh Publ Heath ond Prevetie Meine Cana, Tn: seve, 2003

Community Needs Assessment

+ acommunity needs assessment studies a community’s health gaps and pairs identification of that
community’s existing resources and strengths to find solutions to address those gaps. This assessment
stron ly values interviewing community members to gather their concerns and proposed solutions. Steps
include:

. define the community and understand its history and demographic characteristics to formulate

context for subsequent data collection

understand what matters to community stakeholders (e.g. interviews, surveys, focus groups)

use evidence (e.g. mortality rate, feasibility), prioritize each concern

. identify barriers that may prevent a concern from being addressed and propose solutions using

community-based resources

feE

Measurements of Health and Disease ina

Population
MEASURES OF DISEASE OCCURRENCE

Rates, Ratios, and Proportions

+ arate measures the frequency of an event in a defined population over a specific period of time (e.g, number

of opioid overdoses in Canada in one year)

+ aratio compares the magnitude of one quantity to another (e.g. ratio of women to men with lupus)

+ a proportion is a ratio where the numerator isa part of the denominator (e.g. proportion of deliveries
complicated by placental abruption)

Incidence Rate
+ number of new cases ina population over a specific period of time

Prevalence
+ total number of cases in a population over a defined period of time
+ two forms of prevalence
= point prevalence: assessed at one point in time
= period prevalence: assessed over a period of time, therefore including new cases and excluding cases
that terminate (cure or death)
+ a function of the incidence rate and disease duration from onset to termination
+ favours the inclusion of chronic over acute cases and may underestimate disease burden if those with short
disease duration are missed
+ prevalence estimates are useful for measuring disease burden and therefore help in the planning of
facilities and services

Age-Standardized Rate
+ adjustment of the crude rate of a health-related event using a “standard” population
+ standard population is one with a known number of persons in each age and sex group

Toronto Notes 2025

Principles of Standardization
When comparing a health measure (eg
mortality) between two populations (or
the same population at different time
points) that differ in characteristics known
to influence that outcome (e.g. age),
standardization is used to control for the
effect of that factor

‘Standardization is either direct or indirect

Indirect standardization is expressed as.
standardized outcome ratio. For example,
Standardized Mortality Ratio (SMR) is
calculated using age specific rates for
areference population, as well as age
structure and total cases for a sample!
known population. (e.g, an SMR of 100
signifies that deaths are at the expected
level, a SMR of 110 indicates a death rate
410% higher than expected)

Direct standardization is expressed as
arate (.e. using age specific rates in
a known/sample population against a
standard population)
