PH22 Public Health and Preventive Medicine

A. Are the results of the study valid?
+ see below for classifications of evidence that has already been assessed

B. What are the results?

+ what was the impact of the treatment effect?

+ how precise was the estimate of treatment effect?

+ what were the confidence intervals and power of the study’

C. Will the results help me in caring for my patients?

+ are the results clinically significant?

+ can I apply the results to my patient population?

+ were all clinically important outcomes considered?

+ are the likely treatment benefits worth the potential harm and costs?

Levels of Evidence: Classifications Cited in Guidelines/Consensus Statements
Level evidence: based on RCTs (or meta-analysis of RCTS) big enough to have low risk of incorporating FP or FN resus

Level evidence: based on RCTs too small to provide Level I evidence; may show posttve trends that are non-significant, or have ahigh risk of FN
results

Level ll evidence: based on non-randomized, controlled or cohort studies; case series; case-controlled; or cross-sectional studies
Level IV evidence: based on opinion of respected authorities or expert committees, as published consensus conferences/ guidelines

Level V evidence: opinions ofthe individuals who have writtenvreviewed the guidelines. LeveIV evidence), based on experiencelknowledge of
iteraturepeer discussion
Notes: These levels of evidence are nat direct evaluations of evidence qualty or credibly they reflect the nature ofthe evidence. Whe RCTs tend

to_be most credible (with <I) level Il evidence gains credibility when multiple studies rom different locations andior time periods report consistent
findings. Level IV and V evidence reflects decision-making that is necessary but in the absence of published evidence.

Figure 14. Levels of evidence classifications
Note: This is only one method of classifying evidence. Various systems exist, but operate within the same premise that certain types of evidence carry
more weight than others

Health System Planning and Quality

Assessing and Improving Quality

Quality
* quality of care is the degree to which health services for individuals and populations increase the likelihood
of desired health outcomes and are consistent with professional knowledge

Implications for Patient Safety

quality improvement plays a crucial role in enhancing patient safety in healthcare organizations, such as:
identifying and reducing medical errors, adverse events, infections, and harms associated with healthcare
delivery

effective QI can contribute towards reducing morbidity and mortality rates, and improving patient
outcomes

implementation of QI initiatives also contributes to a culture of safety. Examples include checklists,
guidelines, standardized procedures/protocols

the Swiss cheese model of error proposed by James Reason represents the idea that even multiple barriers
against failure can have limitations, leading to patient harm. To read more, please refer to Chapter 13 of the
AFMC Primer

Quality Improvement (Ql)

+ a means of evaluating and improving processes; focusing more on systems and systematic biases, which are
thought to cause variation in quality

+ measures to increase efficiency of action with the purpose of achieving optimal quality

Quality Assurance
* process to guarantee the quality of health care through improvement and attainment of set standards
+ focuses on performance of individuals or institutions, often in relation to their peers

Quality Control
+ a process of surveying the quality of all factors involved in the process to maintain standards

Continuous Quality Improvement
+ the process of ongoing service/product refinement via the vigilant review of expectant issues detrimental to
the system and regular incorporation of improvements

Quality Management
+ combination of several processes (assurance, control, improvement) to maintain consistent quality

Toronto Notes 2025
