PHO Public Health and Preventive Medicine

Indigenous Approaches to Health and Wellness
+ itis important to recognize the significant diversity amongst Indigenous nations in the land now known as
Canada. Even within the same nation or language group, there will be variability in practices. Despite this
diversity, there are some ideas that recur across many nations
+ restoring balance in the four realms of spiritual, emotional, mental, and physical health of a person acting
as an individual, as well asa member of a family, community, and nation
= ideas represented by the medicine wheel of First Nations peoples, the Learning Blanket of Inuit peoples,
and the Métis tree model all share a worldview based on holistic lifelong learning and wellness
= Indigenous medicines may take many forms (song, dance, smudge, ceremonies, plant medicines, etc.)
= practiced by experts who have decades of apprenticeship
= while allopathic medicine often focuses on treating illness (like high blood pressure or diabetes),
Indigenous medicine may understand the cause of a condition and the approach to healing ina
different way than a biomedical guideline
= Indigenous medicine may focus on quality of life and not just cure
= cultural humility
cultural humility is a respectful, person-centered way of bringing curiosity and compassion when a
patient is willing to come for support
¢ it takes courage to be humble enough to admit that we do not know what we do not know
+ Indigenous medicine is thousands of years old and so far has generally eluded evaluation via
randomized controlled trials
¢ Traditional Medicine is unlikely to interfere with Western Therapies
+ Latin root of “curiosity” is “cura.” which means “to care.” Caring about someone’s healing and their
beliefs about what may help them heal is a powerful act of witnessing and honouring, Beginning
with the belief that a person has wisdom about themselves that no one else does and that we can
be supporters of their healing, if they consent, can be a way to honour the inherent wholeness of
a person seeking care. This is especially true of Indigenous patients for whom regaining self-
determination is tantamount to regaining their wellness.
= before assuming that an Indigenous person is interested in using traditional medicine, it is
important to begin with questions and curiosity. Dr. Chantal Perrot speaks about the Patient Dignity
Questionnaire which advises healthcare workers to first ask patients, “What do I need to know about
you as a person to give you the best care possible?”
= National Indigenous Health Organization (NIHO) offers 8 guidelines on practicing culturally safe
health care for Indigenous patients including the need to allow Indigenous patients to access ceremony,
song, and prayer; the need for information and for family support; guidelines for the appropriate
disposal of body parts and for handling death

Disease Prevention

Natural History of Disease
+ course of a disease from onset to resolution
1. pathological onset
2. presymptomatic stage: from onset to first appearance of symptoms/signs
3. clinical manifestation of disease: may regress spontaneously, be subject to remissions and relapses,
or progress to death

Surveillance
+ the continuous, systematic collection, analysis, and interpretation of health-related data needed for the

planning, implementation, and evaluation of public health practice
‘Sources: Public heath surveilanc internet. Word Heath Organization, Availabe fom. who nt Nopic/pabcbealth survellancefe!

+ types of surveillance
= passive surveillance: reporting of disease data by all institutions that see patients, relying solely on the
cooperation of HCPs (laboratories, hospitals, health facilities, and private practitioners)
+ most common, least expensive, but difficult to ensure completeness and timeliness of data
= active surveillance: regular visits to health facilities for reviewing medical records to identify
suspected cases of disease under surveillance, or active testing of a population for the presence of a
disease
* resource-intensive, used when a disease is targeted for eradication where every possible case must
be investigated, or for outbreak investigations
= sentinel surveillance: selective reporting of disease data from a limited network of carefully selected
reporting sites with a high probability of seeing cases in question
+ well-designed system can be used to signal trends, identify outbreaks, and monitor the burden
of disease in a community in a timely and cost-effective manner compared to other kinds of
surveillance
* may not beas effective in identifying rare diseases, or diseases that occur outside the catchment
area of sentinel sites
Sources: Word Heat Organization. Pubic Health Suveifanc.Acessed fom:
ips: worwvt.ivimmuizain monitoring survellancelbu denpdsurvellancetypepassivelen

Itty. www. who. intfimmunization monitoring_survellance/burden'pd/survellancetypelactiveew
tty. www. who. ntvimmunization monitoring_survellance/burden'vpd/survelance typlsentinelien!

Toronto Notes 2025

Passive Prevention

‘Measures that operate without the person's
active involvement (eg. airbags in cars)
are more effective than active prevention,
which are measures that a person must do
‘on their own (e.g. wearing a seatbelt)

Example of Primary Prevention
HPV 9-Valent Vaccine and ts Efficacy in the
Prevention of Cervical Cancer
anonavalent HPV vaccine covering
strains 6, 1, 6,18, 31, 33, 45,52, and 58
The efficacy ofthis vaccine was studied in
4 randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled trials on females between 11
and 26 yr and was found to prevent nearly
100% of precancerous cervical changes for
upto 4yr after vaccination

