PH32 Public Health and Preventive Medicine Toronto Notes 2025

= workers have the right to:
« know (eg. be trained and have information about workplace hazards)

participate (e.g. have representatives on joint health and safety committees)
refuse work (e.g. workers can decline tasks they feel are overly dangerous)
note: for some occupations, this right is restricted if, for example, danger/risk is normal part of
work or refusal would endanger others (e.g. police, firefighters, some health care workers)
stop work (e.g. ‘certified’ workers can halt work they feel is dangerous to other workers)

«= enforced by Ministry of Labour via inspectors
Health Protection and Promotion Act (HPPA) (Ontario)
Medical Officer of Health has right to investigate and manage health hazards where workplace exposures
may impact non-workers (e.g. community members living close to the work site)

eee

.

Workplace Health Promotion

a strategy for addressing the health and well-being of workers in the workplace, not legislated
may include education, event planning, information campaigns, and workplace supports to promote
personal worker health and a healthy workforce

Workplace Primary Prevention

proactive efforts to reduce workplace illness or injury

achieved through anticipating, recognizing, evaluating, and controlling workplace hazards

hierarchy of controls (see Figure 18, PH31) is followed to minimize exposure — elimination/substitution
of hazards is most superior, followed by isolation (engineering controls), training and behavioural efforts
(administrative controls), and lastly, personal protective equipment

Workplace Secondary Prevention

for workers who are exposed to workplace hazards, goal is to identify earliest signs of overexposure or
disease through medical surveillance (periodic examinations to identify early changes in a single worker or
multiple workers). Some examples include:

= whole blood lead testing to identify effectiveness of controls and to remove workers from exposure

= pulmonary function tests for asthma (e.g. occupational dust exposure)

= audiograms for hearing loss (e.g. occupational noise exposure)

Workplace Tertiary Prevention

treatment of the disease or injury to facilitate safe and timely return to the workforce

may require rehabilitation, return to work planning, retraining, change in job duties, and/or workers’
compensation (WSIB)

often also involves accommodating the workplace for a worker who has a non-occupational injury or
illness, with routine reassessments of the fit between the worker and their duties - work that is considered
safety-sensitive may be restricted for workers with ailments that could impede their ability to work safely,
or aworker may be medically determined to have limitations with what they can reasonably do at work
supporting safe and timely return to work should be a part of rehabilitation; physicians have a role in
delineating restrictions (worker cannot do even if they want to as it will worsen condition), limitations
(worker unable to do due to injury), abilities (focusing on what they are still able to do), and tolerance (what
they are willing to do)

advise relevant authorities if necessary (e.g. report notifiable diseases to public health, conditions impeding
driving to Ministry of Transportation)
