PI7 Pediatrics

+ risk-taking behaviour, alcohol, and substance use
+ use of prescription medication that causes drowsiness
+ inadequate supervision

Rescue and Immediate Resuscitation

. begin conventional CPR (starting with rescue breaths) as soon as possible
+ palpate pulses

+ begin chest compressions

+ administer an automated external defibrillator (AED) when appropriate
+ provide supplemental oxygen

+ manage and protect the airway

+ keep the victim warm

ical Findings
glucose measurement upon arrival in any patient with altered mental status
CXR, ECG, electrolytes and creatinine, LFTs, CBC, PTT

serum ethanol concentration in adolescents

reliable pulse oximetry saturation or ABG

brain Cfifpersistent altered mental status

focused imaging based on concern for injury

Complications of Immersion Injuries

+ duration of submersion is the most critical factor in determining outcome
the rate of death or severe neurologic injury is low when submerged for less than 5 minutes
survivors can sustain long-term pulmonary, neurologic, cardiovascular, and other injuries from

submersion injuries

Adolescent Medicine

Adolescent History (HEEADSSS)
+ review confidentiality and its limits with adolescent prior to taking history
+ tailor your history according to the clinical context
= Note that SSHADESS, a strength-based approach, may also be used as an approach to the adolescent
history: https://www.aap.org/contentassets/0¢45de0366d54ec38{bfcb72382a0c6c/rt2e_ch32_sahm.pdf

Home: Who do you live with? What kind of place do you live in? Do you get along with your parents and/or
siblings? Is your home a safe place for you?

Education/Employment: What grade are you in? What are your favourite subjects? Tell me about your
grades, How often do you miss school/class? Do you work (if so, how much)? Do you get along with teachers/
employers?

Eating: Tell me about your meals/snacks in a typical day. Have you ever gone on a diet? What are your
favourite and least favourite foods? (see Psychiatry, Eating Disorders, PS39)

Activities: What do you do after school? On the weekends? How much time do you spend on the computer/
watching TV every day? Do you use social media (i.e. Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, etc.)? What do you do
with your friends outside of school?

Drugs: Which seems to be more popular at your school, alcohol or drugs? How often do you drink/smoke
cannabis or cigarettes/take other drugs? Have you ever passed out or not been able to remember what
happened? Has anything bad ever happened to you while you were drunk or stoned?
«Pin organize asa CRAFFT screen: Ask Part A, questions 1-. I yes to any, then ask Part B questions 1-6. If
no to all, then move on to Part B, question 1 only
= Part A: during the last 12 mo, did you:
1. Drinkany alcohol?
2. Smoke any cannabis, vape, or inhale anyother substance?
3. Use anything else to get high?
= Part B:
1. Have you ever ridden ina car driven by someone (including yourself) who was high or had been
using drugs/alcohol?
. Do you ever use drugs/alcohol to relax, feel better about yourself, or fit in?
. Do you ever use drugs/alcohol when you are alone?
- Do you ever forget things you did while using drugslalcohol?
. Do your family/friends ever tell you that you should cut down on your drinking or drug use?
. Have you ever gotten into trouble while you were using drugs/alcohol?
+ canalso use the SSHADESS framework for a trauma-informed approach to asking sensitive questions
+ start with impersonal questions ( e.g. “Are many of the teens in your school doing drugs?”), before asking
personal questions (e.g. “Are You using any drugs?”)
«see Psychiatry, Substance-Related and Addictive Disorders, PS26

Aya

Sexuality: What are your preferred pronouns? Do you have a crush on anyone? Do you havea partner?
What does ‘sex’ mean to you? Have you ever had sex? Whether the answer is yes or no, the next question is:

What activities would you include in the term ‘having sex’? What do you do to prevent getting a STI/getting
pregnant/getting someone pregnant? Has anyone ever given you money, drugs, or other stuff in exchange for

sex? (see Gynecology, Sexually Transmitted Infections, GY28)

Suicidality/Depression: How would you describe your mood most days? On a scale of 1 to 10, where 1 is so

Toronto Notes 2025

Adolescent Psychosocial Assessment

HEEADSSS
Home
Education/Employment
Eating

Activities

Drugs

Sexuality

Suicide and depression
Safetyiviolence

Pastyr drug use (%) in Ontario adolescents
(2019): alcohol (41.7%), cannabis (22.0%),
tobacco cigarettes (5.0%), electronic.
cigarettes (22.7%)

CRAFFT Screen
The CRAFFT is a wellvalidated substance
use screening tool for adolescents 12-21 yr.
See the CRAFFT website: craft.org

Consent and Close Age Exceptions

The legal age of consent to sexual activity
816

Ayouth 16 or 17 ylo cannot consent if the
partner isin position of trust/authority
(e.g. coach, teacher), young person is
dependent on the partner (e.g. for care or
support), the relationship is exploitative
(eg. prostitution or pornography)

14 07 15 ylo can consent as long as

the partner is less than 5 yr older and as
Jong as there is no relationship of trust,
authority, dependency, or exploitation
A\12.0r 13 ylo can consent as long as

the partner is less than 2 yr older and as
long as there is no relationship of trust,
authority, dependency, or exploitation

Half of police-reported sexual offences are
against children and youth

4.9% of Canadian youth (ages 1217) have a
‘mood disorder
