P40 Pediatrics

Management
+ if dehydration is suspected based on history (acute illness contributing to decreased intake or increased

losses, reduced urine output including decreased number of wet diapers, lethargy, changes in mental status,

increased thirst, etc.), you must:

4) Determine degree of extracellular volume contraction
Table 19. Assessment of Degree of Extracellular Volume Contraction Based on Physical Exam

Mild Moderate Severe
Weightloss <2yr 7” 108" 15%
Weightloss »2 yr e oe oe
Pulse Normal, ull Rapid Rapid, weak
Blood Pressure Normal Lowto normal Decreased inshack (very late finding inpediatrcs
and very dangerous)
Urine Output Decreased Markedly decreased Anuia
Oral Mucosa Slightly dry Dry Parched
Anterior Fontanelle Normal Sunken Markedly sunken
Eyes Normal Sunken Markedly sunken
‘Skin Turgor Normal Decreased Tenting
Capillary Refill Normal (33) Normal to increased Increased 635)

* Note that percentages refer to percentloss of pre-iiess body weight

2) Determine the likely electrolyte disturbance
+ dependent on etiology of dehydration and type of fluid loss (isotonic vs. hypertonic vs. hypotonic)

Table 20. Electrolyte Content of Various Bodily Fluids

Bodily Fluid Nae (mmol/L) Ke (mmol/l) Cl- (mmol/L) HCO3~ (mmol)
Saliva 30-80 Fr) 1 30

Gastric Juice 60-80 6 100 0

Pancreatic Juice wo 540 60-90 40-100

Bile oT) 540 100 40

‘Small Bowel 40 F) 100 2550

Large Bowel B 30 30 t)

Sweat 200 540 40-60 0

+ for moderate and severe dehydration, initial investigations should include urinalysis and blood work
examining electrolytes (Na’, K*, Cl), glucose, acid-base disturbances (blood pH, pCO2, HCOs"), and
impaired renal function (creatinine, BUN)

3) Determine if the child requires PO, NG, or IV rehydration
+ dehydrated child must receive adequate fluid management, including replacing deficits and ongoing losses,
and maintenance fluids
ORT indication: mild to moderate dehydration

= advantages: + cost, no IV needed, no increase in incidence of iatrogenic hyper/hyponatremia, parental

involvement in therapy

indications for IV rehydration therapy: severe dehydration requiring close monitoring and frequent
assessment of electrolytes, inability to tolerate ORT (e.g. vomiting, alteration in mental status, ileus,
monosaccharide malabsorption, etc.) inability to provide ORT, failure of ORT in providing adequate
rehydration (e.g. persistent diarrhea or vomiting)

4) Retum the child to a normal volume and electrolyte status by replacing current deficits
and ongoing losses

Degree of Detydraton

M y oY v

No dehydration Mild dehydration Moderate dehydration Severe dehydration

y y y

1. Age-appropriate diet 1. Rehydrate with ORT at 1. Rehydrate with ORT at

1. IMresuscitation with

2. Replace ongoing losses 50 mUkg over 4h 100 mL/kg over 4h NS 20 mL/kg bolus
2. Replace ongoing losses 2.Replace ongoinglosses 2. Reassess and
with ORT with ORT repeat if necessary
3. Age-appropriate diet 3. Age-appropriate diet 3. Begin ORT when
after rehydration after rehydration patient is stable
4, Replace ongoing
losses with ORT
5. Age-appropriate
diet after
rehydration

Figure 10. Algorithm for deficit replacement and replacement of ongoing losses in the dehydrated child

Toronto Notes 2025

Assessment of Severity of Dehydration

CBASEH:0
Capillary refill
BP

Anterior fontanelle
Skinturgor

Eyes sunken

HR

Oral mucosa
Outputof urine

‘Special Consideration - SIADH
Ginical Signs: hyponatremia and excretion
of concentrated urine

Risk Factors: certain medications (e.g,
‘morphine), postoperative, pain, NV,
pulmonary disease (e.g. pneumonia), CNS
disease (e.g, meningitis)

Caution: acute hyponatremia is associated
with rapid administration of hypotonic IV
fluids. This can lead to cerebral edema
and brain hemiation or central pontine
myelinotysis

