H38 Hematology
«» LMWH
typically reserved as long term therapy for patients unable to tolerate oral anticoagulants (e.g.
unable to absorb oral medications, high risk bleeding patients with intraluminal GI malignancy)
+ duration of anticoagulant treatment
provoked VTE with transient risk factor: 3 mo
provoked VTE with ongoing risk factor: consider indefinite therapy with annual reassessment
first unprovoked proximal DVT or PE: >3 mo, consider indefinite therapy based on balance of bleeding
vs. thrombotic risk. Prognostic scores (e.g. HERDOO2, DASH) may be used to aid discussion. Reassess
annuall
second unprovoked VTE: consider indefinite therapy if not already on
cancer-associated DVT: consider indefinite therapy for as long as patient has active malignancy
(in patients who have cancer in remission, anticoagulation is usually extended for 3-6 mo post last
treatment)
+ inferior vena cava filters
= temporary filter indicated only if acute DVT (<4 wk) with significant contraindications to anticoagulant
therapy (i.e. active bleeding) or if anticoagulation must be interrupted (i.e. for urgent surgery)
= must be retrieved once safe to do so to prevent long-term complications (migration of filter, thrombosis,
IVC penetration, and filter fracture)
+ special considerations
= pregnancy: treat with LMWH during pregnancy, then LMWH or warfarin for 6 wk post-partum
(minimum total anticoagulation time of 3-6 mo, but must include 6 wk post-partum, as this is a high-
risk period)
= avoid warfarin in pregnancy due to teratogenicity outside of select patient populations (e.g. may be used
by some thrombosis experts during the second and third trimesters in women with mechanical heart
valves)
. avoid DOAC in conception and pregnancy (due to lack of data) and if breastfeeding in postpartum
rior
. surgery’ avoid elective surgery in the first 3 mo after a venous thromboembolic event
+ preoperatively: IV heparin may be used up to 4-6 h preoperatively
. war farin or DOACs discontinued for at least 2-5 d preoperatively (consider mechanism of drug
clearance)
¢ postoperatively: IV heparin, LMWH, DOAC can be used for anticoagulation (consult with surgeon
prior to re-initiation)
¢ for patients at high-risk for thromboembolism (VTE <12 wk, recurrent VTE, APS, AFib with prior
stroke, and mechanical heart valve), IV heparin or LMWH (bridging) may be considered before and
after the procedure while the INR is below 2.0. Bridging not required for DOACs

In Hospital Prophylaxis

consider for those with a moderate to high-risk of thrombosis without contraindications
non-pharmacological measures include: early ambulation, elastic compression stockings (TEDs), and
intermittent pneumatic compression (IPC)

LMWHas per hospital protocol (e.g. enoxaparin 40 mg SC once daily, dalteparin 5000 U SC once daily), or
rarely UFH 5000 IU SC BID, UFH 5000 IU SC TID. LMWH dose adjustments are typically implemented for
patients <40 kgand >100 kg in weight

DOACs for orthopedic surgery thromboprophylaxis

Table 29. Contraindications of Anticoagulant Therapy
‘Absolute Contraindications to Treatment Relative Contraindications to Treatment

Activebleeding Mild-moderate bleeding iathesis or thrombocytopenia
Severe bleeding dathesis or platelet count <20 x 107L Recentmajor trauma
(-20000/mm’) Recentstroke
Major abdominal surgery within past2¢
6U/GUbleeding within +4
Endocardtis
Neurosurgery or ocular surgery within 10d

Treatment of Pulmonary Embolism
+ see Respirology, R20

Toronto Notes 2025

‘Common Medications that Interact with
Warfarin

Acetaminophen (interference with
vitamin K metabolism)

Allopurinol

NSAIDs (GI injury)

Fluconazole

Metronidazole

Sulfamethoxazole

Tamoxifen

Efect of Treatment Delay on the Effectiveness

and Safety of Antifibrinolytics in Acute Severe
Hemorthage: a Meta-analysis of Individual Patient-
level Data from 40138 Bleeding Patients

Lancet 208;39.15132

Purpose: To examine the effectiveness of
antibinoicsnedvcing death romacutesvere
teorthageintuenced by treatment delay.
Methods: Metaanahis of inva patient-level data
from2 RCTs with 40138 total patientsthatimestigated
theuseo! ranecanicacdinacutesevre bleeding.
Treatment benefit was measured by absencot death
frombleeing and lgisticregessin wasused to assess
theeffectof treatment delay,

Results Overalsurvivlfombleeding was siuticanty
inceasedy tranexamic acd (OR1.2;98% 1108-133;
0.001) Survival wasimprovedby>70% with immediate
tveatmen(0R1.72, 95% C1142-210; P<, 0001.
contrast, treatment enefit was significantly reducedby
treatment delay (0.000) Specialy, survival was
reduced by 10% forever 15 mindelayf treatment unt
3h, atwhch point no benefit was demonstrated
Condusion: Patents wth severe acatebleeing
shouldbe teted immediate, asevena shotdelay

in treatment reduces the survival benefit of tranexamic
wid

ASCO Ginical Practice Guidelines for VTE Prophylaxis
and Treatmentin Patients with Cancer
Jin Oncol 2020;38496 520
Cinkianscanotferthromboprophylxsaptaban,
thvaroaban, or LH) for
igh iskoutpatients with cancer
As options for VIE treatment
Forlng-trm anticoagulation (ni. 6 mo; better
efficacy pols than vitamin K antagonists)
Throughout hospitalzation (patents wth cancer and
anacate medica condition)
Major cance surgery prophylaxis starting prior and
continuing for min, 7-10¢)

Initiation of Warfarin Therapy Requires
Bridging with Heparin Therapy for 4-5
Ss

10 mg loading dose of warfarin causes
a precipitous dedine in protein C levels

in first 36 h resulting in a transient
hypercoagulable state

Warfarin decreases Factor Vil levels

in first 48 h, INR is prolonged (most
sensitive to Factor Vil levels), however full
antithrombotic effect is not achieved until
Factor IX, X, and Il are sufficiently reduced
(occurs after ~4 a)
