PS20 Psychiatry Toronto Notes 2025

Related Disorders

Body Dysmorphic Disorder
* preoccupation with >1 perceived flaws in physical appearance not observed by others
repetitive behaviours (e.g. mirror checking, excessive grooming, skin picking, or reassurance seeking) or
mental acts (e.g. comparing self to others) related to appearance
+ muscle dysmorphia
causes clinically significant distress or functional impairment
rule out eating disorder
mean age of onset: 15 y/o
symptoms tend to be chronic; high rate of suicidal ideation and attempts; comorbidity with MDD, social
anxiety disorder, and OCD
+ treatment: SSRIs, CBT (specific to body dysmorphic disorder)

Hoarding Disorder

persistent difficulty discarding possessions regardless of actual value

feels the need to save items, discarding creates distress

results in possessions cluttering/compromising active living areas (may be uncluttered with 3rd party
intervention, i.e. family member, cleaners, authorities)

causes clinically significant distress or functional impairment

rule out brain injury, cerebrovascular disease, Prader-Willi syndrome, OCD, MDD (low energy), psychotic
disorder (delusions), neurocognitive disorder, ASD (restricted interests)

tends to begin in teens and worsens over time, more common in older populations, large genetic component
treatment: CBT (specific to hoarding disorder)

Trichotillomania (Hair-Pulling Disorder)
recurrent pulling out own hair resulting in hair loss (usually involves scalp, eyebrows, or eyelashes but may
include other hair)
repeated attempts to stop or decrease hair pullin;
causes clinically significant distress or functional impairment
rule out dermatological condition, body dysmorphic disorder
treatment: CBT (habit reversal training), SSRIs, 2nd gen. antipsychotics, N-acetylcysteine, or lithium

Excoriation (Skin-Picking) Disorder

+ recurrent skin picking resulting in lesions

* repeated attempts to stop or decrease skin pickin;

* causes clinically significant distress or functional impairment

+ rule out scabies, substance use (e.g. cocaine), psychotic disorder (e.g. delusions, tactile hallucinations), body
dysmorphic disorder, stereotypic movement disorder, non-suicidal self-injury

+ treatment similar to trichotillomania (described above)

Trauma- and Stressor-Related Disorders

Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder

DSM-5 DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA FOR POST-TRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER

Reprinted with permission from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Sth ed. 2013, American Psychiatric Association.
A. exposure to actual or threatened death, serious injury, or sexual violence in one (or more) of the following
ways:

directly experiencing the traumatic event(s) ©
. witnessing, in person, the event(s) as it occurred to others

learning that the traumatic event(s) occurred to a close family member or close friend; in cases of ‘The Trauma Triangle
actual or threatened death of a family member or friend, the event(s) must have been violent or ee
accidental Tae
experiencing repeated or extreme exposure to aversive details of the traumatic event(s) (e.g. first
responders collecting human remains: police officers repeatedly exposed to details of child abuse)
B. presence of one (or more) of the following intrusion symptoms associated with the traumatic event(s),

beginning after the traumatic event(s) occurred:

. recurrent, involuntary, and intrusive distressing memories of the traumatic event(s)
2. recurrent distressing dreams in which the content and/or affect of the dream are related to the
traumatic event(s)
dissociative reactions (e.g. flashbacks) in which the individual feels or acts as if the traumatic event(s)
were recurring
intense or prolonged psychological distress at exposure to internal or external cues that symbolize or
resemble an aspect of the traumatic event(s)
marked physiological reactions to internal or external cues that symbolize or resemble an aspect of
the traumatic event(s)

yr

S

»

S

v
