PS27 Psychiatry

+ substance use disorders arise from multifactorial interactions between genetic (neurobiology), individual
(psychological), and environmental factors (low socioeconomic status, peer influence, adverse childhood or
traumatic experiences, social isolation, systemic racism, and chronic stress)

+ certain comorbid conditions may also predispose individuals to a substance use disorder (e.g. mental
illness, chronic disease, acute and chronic pain)

+ environmental factors play a significant role in the exposure to the substance. For instance, the over
prescription of opioids for pain in North America played a major role in the development of the opioid use
disorder crisis

Diagnosis
+ each specific substance is addressed as a separate use disorder and diagnosed utilizing the same
overarching criteria (e.g. a single patient may have moderate alcohol use disorder, and a mild stimulant use
disorder)
+ testing for illicit drugs is most commonly done on urine or blood samples
= serum toxicology screen measures recent alcohol consumption but has no relation to the diagnosis of
alcohol use disorder
= toxicology may be helpful in differentiating withdrawal from other mental disorders
= urine drug screens are useful for detecting recent drug use, but not for diagnosing substance use
disorders
+ substance use disorders are measured on a continuum from mild to severe based on the number of criteria
met within 12 mo
= mild: 2-3
= moderate: 4-5
= severe: 6 or more
+ criteria for substance use disorders (PEC WITH MCAT)
= use ilespite Physical or psychological problem (e.g. alcoholic liver disease or cocaine related nasal
roblems)
= failure to fulfill External roles at work/school/home
Craving or a strong desire to use substance
Withdrawal
continued use despite Interpersonal problems
Tolerance: needing to use more substance to get same effect
use in physically Hazardous situations
More substance used or for longer period than intended
unsuccessful attempts to Cut down
Activities given up due to substance
excessive Time spent on using or finding substance

Table 4. Substance Symptomatology

Drugs Symptoms of Intoxication Symptoms of Withdrawal
‘CHS Depressants ‘Alcohol, opioids, barbiturates, Euphoria, slured speech disinhibition, Anxiety, anhedo
benzodiazepines, GHB Confusion, poorcoordination, coma insomnia, psychosis, delirium, death
(severe)
Stimulants Amphetamines, methyiphenate, Euphoria, mania psychomotoragitation, “Crash; craving dysphoria suicidality
MDMA, cocaine anxiety, psychosis especialy paranoia),
insomnia, cardiovascular complications
(stroke, Ml, artythmias), seizure
Hallucinogens LSD, mescaline, psilocybin, PCP, Distortion of sensory stimuli and Usually absent

ketamine, ibogaine, salvia enhancementof feelings, psychosis (++
visual halucinations), delirium, ansiety

(paid, poor coordination

General Approach to Assessment

+ a comprehensive evaluation should inquire about drug history including names of substances used,
amount, frequency, duration, routes, last use, injection drug use, needle sharing, symptoms of withdrawal,
consequences of use (medical, social, or personal), previous treatment programs and medical (e.g. HIV,
hepatitis B and C, chronic pain), psychiatric (e.g. mood and anxiety disorders), and social history (e.g.
family and housing arrangements, any child safety concerns)

+ ask about more socially accepted substances (e.g. nicotine, alcohol) before asking about use of cannabis,
misuse of prescription medicines, and about illicit drugs

+ obtaining collateral history is recommended as well as evaluating patient insight into the problem.

Lab Testing

+ urine, saliva, sweat, and hair can be tested for the presence of drugs

+ urine is most commonly used due to ease of collection and adequate sensitivity and specificity, but it does
not reflect serum concentrations

+ proper urine drug testing involves an initial screening test (qualitative) followed by confirmatory testing for
substances with positive screening results

+ most confirmatory tests use gas or high-performance liquid chromatography

Toronto Notes 2025

Questions to Characterize Substance Use
and Risk Assessment (THE WATER)

When was the last Time you used?

How long can you go without using?

Have you Experienced medical or legal
consequences of your use?

Any previous attempts to cut down or quit,
and did you experience any Withdrawal
symptoms?

How has your substance use Affected your
work, school, relationships?

Are there any Triggers that you know will
cause you touse?

Substances can be very Expensive, how do
you support your drug use?

By what Route (oral ingestion, inhalation
(snorting), smoking, 1) do you usually use?
