PSi0 Psychiatry

D. the disturbance is not attributable to the effects of a substance or another medical condition
+ specifiers: bipolar type, depressive type, with catatonia, type of episode (ie. first episode, multiple episode),
severity

Epidemiology

+ one-third as prevalent as schizophrenia; schizoaffective disorder bipolar type more common in young
adults, schizoaffective disorder depressive type more common in older adults

+ depressive symptoms correlated with higher suicide risk (lifetime risk 5%)

Treatment
+ antipsychotics, mood stabilizers, and antidepressants

Prognosis
+ between that of schizophrenia and of mood disorder

Delusional Disorder

DSM-5 DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA FOR DELUSIONAL DISORDER
Reprinted with permission from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Sthed. 2013. American Psychiatric Associaton

A. the presence of one (or more) delusions with a duration of 1 mo or longer

B. criterion A for schizophrenia has never been met
Note: hallucinations, if present, are not prominent and are related to the delusional theme

C. apart from the impact of the delusion(s) or its ramifications, functioning is not markedly impaired, and
behaviour is not obviously bizarre or odd

D. if manic or major depressive episodes have occurred, these have been brief relative to the duration of the
delusional periods

E, the disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance or another medical condition
and is not better explained by another mental disorder

+ subtypes: erotomanic, grandiose, jealous, persecutory, somatic, mixed, unspecified

+ further specify: bizarre content, type of episode (e.g. first episode, multiple episode), severity

Treatment
+ antipsychotics, psychotherapy, and antidepressants

Prognosis
* may respond well to antipsychotics, but most patients refuse them and have chronic, unremitting course;
some maintain a high level of functioning; some progress to schizophrenia

* accurate diagnosis of a mood disorder requires a careful past medical and psychiatric history to detect
past mood episodes and to rule out whether these episodes were secondary to substance use, a medical
condition, etc.

+ mood episodes represent a combination of symptoms comprising a predominant mood state that is
abnormal in quality or duration (i.e. major depressive, manic, mixed, hypomanic). DSM-5 Criteria for

mood episodes are listed below

types of mood disorders include:

= depressive (MDD, persistent depressive disorder)

= bipolar (bipolar I/II disorder, cyclothymia)

= induced by or due to (“secondary to”) a general medical condition (GMC), substance, medication, or
other psychiatric condition

Medical Workup of Mood Disorder

+ routine screening: physical exam, CBC, electrolytes and extended electrolytes, LFT, renal and thyroid
function tests, drug screen, medications list

additional screening: vitamin B12 (in older people), neurological consultation, chest x-ray, ECG, head
imaging

Toronto Notes 2025
