PSI8 Psychiatry

Generalized Anxiety Disorder

DSM-5 DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA FOR GENERALIZED ANXIETY DISORDER
Reprinted with permission from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Dsrders, Sthed. 2013. American Psychiatric Associaton

A. excessive anxiety and worry (apprehensive expectation), occurring more days than not for at least 6 mo,
about a number of events or activities (such as work or school performance)

B. the individual finds it difficult to control the worry

C. the anxiety and worry are associated with three (or more) of the following six symptoms (with at least some
symptoms having been present for more days than not for the past 6 mo)

. restlessness or feeling keyed up or on edge

_ being easily fatigued

. difficulty concentrating or mind going blank

. irritability

. muscle tension

. sleep disturbance (difficulty falling or staying asleep, or restless, unsatisfying sleep)

D. the anxiety, worry, or physical symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social,

occupational, or other important areas of functioning

E.the disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance or another medical condition

F.the disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder

au Rene

Epidemiology
+ Lyr prevalence: 1-4%, lifetime prevalence 6%; M:F=1:2
= 8% of all who seek primary care treatment (WHO)
= in primary care: 70% initially present with physical symptoms as main concern

+ bimodal age of onset: before 20 or middle adulthood
‘Source: Depression and other common mental disorders: Global healt estimates, Geneva: World Health Organization, 2017

Treatment

+ lifestyle: avoid caffeine and EtOH, sleep hygiene

. parchological: CBT (cognitive restructuring), muscle relaxation techniques, mindfulness

+ biological
. ist line: SSRIs (escitalopram, sertraline, paroxetine), SNRIs (venlafaxine XR, duloxetine), pregabalin
= benzodiazepines considered 2nd line (short-term, lowest effective dose, helpful while titrating

antidepressant)

«= B-blockers not recommended

Prognosis

+ good with treatment

+ depends on pre-morbid personality functioning, stability of relationships, work, and severity of
environmental stress

Social Anxiety

Definition

+ marked and persistent (>6 mo) fear of social or performance situations in which one is exposed to
unfamiliar people or to possible scrutiny by others. They fear that they will be negatively evaluated in a way
that may be humiliating, embarrassing, or lead to rejection (e.g. public speaking, initiating or maintaining
conversation, dating, eating in public)

situations are avoided or endured with intense anxiety and causes significant distress or impairment in
functioning

+ lifetime prevalence 8-12%; MF ratio approximately equal

Epidemiology
+ lifetime prevalence 8-12%; MF ratio approximately equal

Treatment
+ CBT, SSRIs and SNRIs; if poor response or intolerance: benzodiazepine, MAOI, pregabalin

Phobic Disorders

Specific Phobias

+ definition: marked and persistent (>6 mo) fear that is excessive or unreasonable, cued by presence or
anticipation of a specific object or situation

«+ lifetime prevalence 10-13%; MF ratio variable

+ types: animal/insect, environment (e.g. heights, storms), blood/injection/injury, situational (e.g. airplane,
closed spaces), other (e.g. loud noise, clowns), multiple fears

Diagnostic Criteria for Phobic Disorders

+ marked fear/anxiety about a specific object/situation

* exposure to stimulus almost invariably provokes an immediate fear/anxiety response; may present asa
panic attack

Toronto Notes 2025

Criteria for GAD @3)

CFIRST
Concentration issues
Fatigue

Irritability
Restlessness

Sleep disturbance
Tension (muscle)
