PS13 Psychiatry

= ECT: currently fastest and most effective treatment for MDD. Consider in severe, psychotic, or
treatment-resistant cases
«= rTMS: Ist line treatment for MDD for patients who have failed at least 1 antidepressant treatment.
Efficacy equivalent to medications (but not to ECT) with good safety and tolerability
+ psychological
« individual therapy (CBT, interpersonal, behavioural activation, dynamic), group therapy, family
therapy
+ social: vocational rehabilitation, social skills training
+ experimental: magnetic seizure therapy, deep brain stimulation, ketamine

Prognosis

«+ Lyrafter diagnosis of MDD without treatment: 40% of individuals will still have symptoms that are
sufficiently severe to meet criteria for MDD, 20% will continue to have some symptoms that no longer meet
criteria for MDD, 40% will have no symptoms

PERSISTENT DEPRESSIVE DISORDER

DSM-5 DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA FOR PERSISTENT DEPRESSIVE DISORDER
Note: in DSM-IV-TR this was referred tas ysthymic Disorder
Reprinted with pemission rom the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Sthed. 2013. American Psychiatric Association

A. depressed mood for most of the day, for more days than not, as indicated either by subjective account or
observation by others, for >2 yr
Note: In children and adolescents, mood can be irritable and duration must be at least 1 yr

B, presence, while depressed, of 22 of the following
= poor appetite or overeating
= insomnia or hypersomnia
= low energy or fatigue
= low self-esteem
. poor concentration or difficulty making decisions
= feelings of hopelessness
C. during the 2 yr period (1 yr for children or adolescents) of the disturbance, the person has never been
without the symptoms in criteria A and B for more than 2 mo at a time

D. criteria fora major depressive disorder may be continuously present for 2 yr

E. there has never been a manic episode or a hypomanic episode, and criteria have never been met for
cyclothymic disorder

F, the disturbance is not better explained by a persistent schizoaffective disorder, schizophrenia, delusional
disorder, or other specified or unspecified schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorder

G. the symptoms are not due to the direct physiological effects of a substance or another medical condition

H. the symptoms cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other
important areas of functioning

+ specifiers:

«= with anxious distress, mixed features, melancholic features, atypical features, mood-congruent
psychotic features, mood-incongruent psychotic features, catatonia, peripartum onset, seasonal pattern
partial remission, full remission
early onset (<21 y/o), late onset (>21 y/o)
with pure dysthymic syndrome (full criteria for MDE have not been met in at least preceding 2 yr), with
persistent MDE (full criteria for MDE have been met throughout preceding 2 yr)
with intermittent MDEs, with current episode: full criteria for a MDE are currently met, but there have
been periods of at least 8 wk in at least the preceding 2 yr with symptoms below the threshold for a full
MDE
with intermittent MDEs, without current episode: full criteria fora MDE are not currently met, but
there has been one or more MDEs in at least the preceding 2 yr
specify current severity: mild, moderate, severe

Epidemiology
«lifetime prevalence: 2-3%; M=F

Treatment
+ psychological
= traditionally, psychotherapy was the principal treatment for persistent depressive disorder; recent
evidence suggests some (but generally inferior) benefit for pharmacological treatment. Combinations of
the two may be most efficacious
+ biological
= antidepressant therapy: SSRIs (e.g. sertraline, escitalopram), TCAs (e.g. nortriptyline)

Toronto Notes 2025

See Landmark Psychiatry Trials table

for more information on TRANSFORM-2,
which details the use of esketamine nasal
spray for patients with treatment-resistant
depression,
