PS23 Psychiatry

+ psychosocial: grief therapy (individual or group) is indicated for those needing additional support or
experiencing complex grief/ bereavement or significant MDD

+ pharmacotherapy: if MDD present, past history of mood disorders, or severe symptoms

Neurocognitive Disorde:

Delirium

« see Neurology, N21

DSM-5 DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA FOR DELIRIUM
Reprinted with pemission rom the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Sthed. 2013. American Psychiatric Association

A.a disturbance in attention (i.e. reduced ability to direct, focus, sustain, and shift attention) and awareness
(i.e. reduced orientation to the environment)

B. the disturbance develops over a short period of time (usually hours to a few days), represents a change from
baseline attention and awareness, and tends to fluctuate in severity during the course of aday

C. an additional disturbance in cognition (e.g. memory deficit, disorientation, language, visuospatial ability,
or perception)

D. the disturbances in criteria A and C are not better explained by another preexisting, established, or
evolving neurocognitive disorder and do not occur in the context of a severely reduced level of arousal (e.g.
coma)

E. there is evidence from the history, physical exam, or laboratory findings that the disturbance is a direct
physiological consequence of another medical condition, substance intoxication or withdrawal (ie. due toa
drug of abuse or toa medication), or exposure to a toxin, or is due to multiple etiologies

Clinical Features
+ common symptoms
= disturbance of attention: distractibility, disorientation (time, place, rarely person)
sleep/wake disturbance (daytime sedation, nighttime agitation, or wakefulness)
psychoticlike symptoms such as delusions, misinterpretations, illusions, and hallucinations (visual
allucinations are organic until proven otherwise)
affective symptoms (anxiety, fear, depression, irritability, anger, euphoria, apathy)
shifts in psychomotor activity (groping/picking at clothes, attempts to get out of bed when unsafe,
sudden movements, sluggishness, lethargy)
+ note: fluctuation/major changes in all of the above over the course of the day are to be expected - so
collateral history is important
+ hyperactive 30% vs. hypoactive 24% vs. mixed level of activity 46%

Risk Factors

+ awide range of medical conditions can precipitate delirium ina susceptible individual and there may be
multiple underlying etiologies as a result

polypharmacy particularly involving psychoactive drugs, anticholinergics, and serotonergic medications

(e.g. Cogentin’, Benadryl’, benzodiazepines, opioids, and corticosteroids)

infection, dehydration, malnutrition, immobility (including use of restraints), and use of bladder catheters

hospitalization (incidence 10-56%); frail and surgical patients are at the greatest risk

previous delirium

nursing home residents (incidence 60%)

old age (especially males)

severe illness (e.g. cancer, AIDS)

recent anesthesia or surgery (e.g. emergency hip fracture surgery, cardiac surgery)

brain vulnerability: pre-existing neurologic or neurocognitive disorder, substance use disorder, past

psychiatric illness

Assessment

+ observation: for disturbances in consciousness, incoherent and/or disorganized speech, inability to
concentrate upon conversation, disruption of sleep-wake cycle

history: often gathered from collateral sources as patients may be confused and/or uncooperative

clinical instruments: Confusion Assessment Method (CAM) and formal mental status testing, such as the
Mini-Mental State Examination, used as needed, are helpful for baseline and ongoing assessment of altered
mental state (i.e. score will improve as symptoms resolve)

physical examination: may be difficult to perform; focus on vital signs, hydration status, potential
infectious foci, unambiguous neurologic deficits, and suggestive features of general appearance (e.g.
jaundice)

medication review: drug toxicity accounts for approximately 30% of all delirium cases (including OTC,
non-prescribed medications)

Toronto Notes 2025

Confusion Assessment Method (CAM) for
Diagnosis of Delirium

Highly sensitive and specific method to
diagnose delirium
Part 1: an assessment instrument that.
screens for overall cognitive impairment
Part 2: includes four features found best
able to distinguish delirium from other
cognitive impairments

Need (1) + (2)+ (30r 4)

{1) Acute onset and fluctuating course

(2) Inattention

{G) Disorganized thinking

(4) Altered level of consciousness -
hyperactive or hypoactive

Etiology of Delirium

WATCH DEATH

Infectious (encephalitis, meningitis,
urinary tract infection, pneumonia)
Withdrawal alcohol, barbiturates,
benzodiazepines)

Acute metabolic disorder (electrolyte
nce, hepatic or renal failure)
ead injury, postoperative)
CNS pathology (stroke, hemorthage,
tumour, seizure disorder, Parkinson's)
Hypoxia (anemia, cardiac failure,
pulmonary embolus)

Deficiencies (vitamin B12, folicacid,
thiamine)

Endocrinopathies (thyroid, glucose,
parathyroid, adrenal)

Acute vascular (shock, vasculitis,
hypertensive encephalopathy)

Toxins: substance use, sedatives, opioids
{especially morphine), anesthetics,
anticholinergics, anticonvulsants,
dopaminergic agents, steroids, insulin,
glyburide, antibiotics (especially
quinolones), NSAIDs

Heavy metals (arsenic, lead, mercury)

