PSI7 Psychiatry

C. the disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance or another medical condition
D. the disturbance is not better explained by another mental disorder

Epidemiology

+ lifetime prevalence: 5% (one of the top five most common reasons to see a family physician); M:F=1:2-3
+ onset: average early-mid 20s, familial pattern

+ comorbidities: depression, agoraphobia, medical comorbidity

Treatment
«+ pharmacological and psychological treatment together can be very effective
+ psychological
«= CBT: exposure (graduated exposure to unpleasant sensations of arousal associated with a panic attack
for experiential disconfirmation of their fears), cognitive restructuring (addressing underlying beliefs
regarding the panic attacks), relaxation techniques (i.e. visualization, box-breathing), psychoeducation
+ pharmacological (first line agents)
SSRIs: fluoxetine, citalopram, escitalopram, paroxetine, sertraline, fluvoxamine
SNRI: venlafaxine extended release
with SSRI/SNRIs, start with low doses and titrate up as tolerated
anxiety disorders often require treatment at higher doses for a longer period of time than depression
(full response may take up to 12 wk)
treat for up to 1 yr after symptoms resolve to avoid relapse
explain expected adverse effects prior to initiation of therapy to prevent non-adherence
other antidepressants: (i.e. mirtazapine, TCAs)
benzodiazepines considered 2nd line (short-term, lowest effective dose, helpful while titrating
antidepressant)

Prognosis

+ 85% can achieve good results, 10-20% continue with significant symptoms. Longer term, 65% achieve
remission

+ clinical course: chronic, but episodic with psychosocial stressors

Agoraphobia

DSM-5 DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA FOR AGORAPHOBIA
Reprinted with pemisson rom the Diagnostic an Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Sth ed. 2073, American Psychiatric Association

A. marked fear or anxiety about two (or more) of the following five situations:
= using public transportation
= being in open spaces
«= being in enclosed places
= standing in line or being in a crowd
= being outside of the home alone
B, the individual fears or avoids these situations because of thoughts that escape might be difficult or
help might not be available in the event of developing panic-like symptoms or other incapacitating or
embarrassing symptoms
C. the agoraphobic situations almost always provoke fear or anxiety
D, the agoraphobic situations are actively avoided, require the presence of a companion, or are endured with
intense fear or anxiety
E. the fear or anxiety is out of proportion to the actual danger posed by the agoraphobic situations and to the
sociocultural context
F. the fear, anxiety, or avoidance is persistent, typically lasting >6 mo
G. the fear, anxiety, or avoidance causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational,
or other important areas of functioning
H. if another medical condition is present, the fear, anxiety, or avoidance is clearly excessive
I. the fear, anxiety, or avoidance is not better explained by the symptoms of another mental disorder and
are not related exclusively to obsessions, perceived defects or flaws in physical appearance, reminders of
traumatic events, or fear of separation
Note: agoraphobia is diagnosed irrespective of the presence of panic disorder. If an individual’s
presentation meets criteria for panic disorder and agoraphobia, both diagnoses should be assigned

Treatment
+ current evidence suggests that treatment of agoraphobia should follow the same recommendations for
agoraphobia treatment with panic disorder

Toronto Notes 2025

Panic Attack vs. Panic Disorder

Panic disorder requires recurrent,

unexpected panic attacks + fear of another
ic attack

P
Panic attacks can occur in the context of
‘many different disorders

Starting Medication for Anxiety
Start low, go slow, aim high, and explain
symptoms to expect prior to initiation of
therapy to prevent non-adherence due to
side effects
