PS34 Psychiatry

Somatic Symptom Disorder

DSM-5 DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA FOR SOMATIC SYMPTOM DISORDER
Reprinted with permission from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Sthed. 2013. American Psychiatric Assacaton

A. one or more somatic symptoms that are distressing or result in significant disruption of daily life
B. excessive thoughts, feelings, or behaviours related to the somatic symptoms or associated health concerns
as manifested by at least one of the following:
1. disproportionate and persistent thoughts about the seriousness of one’s symptoms
2. persistently high level of anxiety about health or symptoms
3. excessive time and energy devoted to these symptoms or health concerns
. although any one somatic symptom may not be continuously present, the state of being symptomatic is
persistent (typically >6 mo)

fo

somatic symptom disorder with predominant pain (previously pain disorder) for those whose somatic
symptom is primarily pain

prevalence: 5-7%; F > M although cultural factors might play a role

other risk factors include: history of sexual abuse, lower education and socioeconomic status, and
concurrent psychiatric/chronic physical illnesses

complications: anxiety and depression commonly comorbid (up to 80%), unnecessary medications, or
surger

often 2 misdiagnosis for an insidious illness, so rule out all organic illnesses (e.g. multiple sclerosis)
DDx: GAD, depressive disorder, delusional disorder, body dysmorphic disorder, obsessive compulsive
disorder, other medical condition

Illness Anxiety Disorder

preoccupation with fear of having, or the idea that one has a serious disease to the point of causing
significant impairment

convictions persist despite negative investigations and medical reassurance; however, able to acknowledge
the possibility that feared disease is not present, unlike a delusion, which is a fixed belief

somatic symptoms are mild or not present (not acute)

there is a high level of anxiety about health and the individual is easily alarmed about personal health
status

person engages in maladaptive behaviour such as excessive physical checking or total healthcare avoidance
duration is 26 mo; onset in 3rd-4th decade of life

epidemiology: 3-5% of patients seen by primary care physicians; increased risk of substance use problems
possible role for SSRIs as treatment due to generally high level of anxiety

specifiers: care-seeking type or care-avoidant type

Conversion Disorder (Functional Neurological Symptom Disorder)

one or more symptoms or deficits affecting voluntary motor or sensory function that mimic a neurological
or GMC (e.g. impaired coordination, local paralysis, double vision, seizures, or convulsions)

does not need to be preceded by a psychological event as per previous DSM criteria; however this is still
worth exploring as many patients will present after such an event, or are related to a medical diagnosis in a
first-degree relative

incidence of 2-5 in 100000 in general population; up to 20-25% of neurology inpatients and 5% of psychiatry
inpatients

+ more common in rural populations

spontaneous remission in 95% of acute cases, 50% of chronic cases (>6 mo)

incompatible findings detected from specific neurological testing can help differentiate between functional
and neurological origin (e.g. Hoover's sign and dermatome testing)

+ for more details about Conversion Disorder, please consult the DSM-5

Table 7. Differential of Somatic Symptom and Related Disorders

‘Somatic Symptom ness Anxiety Disorder ConversionDisorder Factitious Disorder Malingering
Disorder
Somatic Symptoms Present Mildor absent Neurologic, vointary Psychological orphysial Psychologica or physical
motor or sensory
Symptoms Produced —_Unconsciously Unconsciously Unconsciously Consciously Consciously
Physical Findings Absent Rosent Incompatible Possible, attemptsto Possible, attempts to
falsity falsity

Toronto Notes 2025

Screening questions for somatic disorders
1. When did the symptoms start?
2. Have youbeen frustrated with getting
no answers?

What has been your experience with
other physicians?

4. Whatis your understanding of your
symptoms?

How have the symptoms affected your
lite?

Labelle indifference: an inappropriately
cavalier patient attitude in the face of
serious symptoms; classically associated
with conversion disorder but is not
diagnostic

Hoover's sign: involuntary extension of
the “normal” leg occurs when flexing the
contralateral leg against resistance
