PSs Psychiatry

Schizophrenia

DSM-5 DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA FOR SCHIZOPHRENIA
Reprinted with permission fromthe Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Sthed. 2013. American Psychiatric Associaton

A. two (or more) of the following, each present for a significant portion of time during a 1 mo period (or less if
successfully treated). At least one of these must be (1), (2), or (3)
1. delusions
2. hallucinations
3. disorganized speech (e.g. frequent derailment or incoherence)
4, grossly disorganized or catatonic behaviour
5. negative symptoms (i.e. diminished emotional expression or avolition)

B. for a significant portion of time since the onset of the disturbance, level of functioning in one or more major
areas (e.g. work, interpersonal relations, self-care) is markedly below the level achieved prior to the onset
(or when the onset is in childhood or adolescence, there is failure to achieve expected level of interpersonal,

academic, or occupational functioning)

continuous signs of the disturbance persist for at least 6 mo. This 6 mo period must include at least 1 mo

of symptoms (or less if successfully treated) that meet Criterion A (i.e. active-phase symptoms) and may

include periods of prodromal or residual symptoms. During these prodromal or residual periods, the signs
of the disturbance may be manifested by only negative symptoms or by two or more symptoms listed in.

Criterion A present in an attenuated form (e.g. odd beliefs, unusual perceptual experiences)

D. schizoaffective disorder and depressive or bipolar disorder with psychotic features have been ruled out
because either 1) no major depressive or manic episodes have occurred concurrently with the active-phase
symptoms, or 2) if mood episodes have occurred during active-phase symptoms, they have been present for
a minority of the total duration of the active and residual periods of the illness

. the disturbance is not attributable to the physiological effects of a substance (e.g. drug of abuse, medication)
or another medical condition
if there is a history of autism spectrum disorder or a communication disorder of childhood onset, the
additional diagnosis of schizophrenia is made only if prominent delusions or hallucinations, in addition
to theather required symptoms of schizophrenia are also present for at least 1 mo (or less if successfully
treated)
specifiers: type of episode (e.g. first episode, multiple episodes, continuous), in acute episode/partial/
full remission, with catatonia, current severity based on quantitative assessment of primary symptoms of
psychosis

is

mom

Epidemiology

+ prevalence: 0.3-0.7%, M:F=1:1

+ mean age of onset: females late-20s with a 2nd peak in mid-life; males early- to mid-20s (some cases with
late onset)

+ suicide risk: 5-6% die by suicide, 20% attempt suicide

Etiology

+ multifactorial: disorder is a result of interaction between both biological and environmental factors
genetic: 40% concordance in monozygotic (MZ) twins; 46% if both parents have schizophrenia; 10% of
dizygotic (DZ) twins, siblings, children affected; vulnerable genes include Disrupted-in-Schizophrenia
1 (DISC1); neuregulin 1 (NRG 1); dystrobrevin binding protein/dysbindin (DTNBP1); catechol-O-
methyltransferase (COMT); d-amino acid oxidase activator (DAOA); metabotropic glutamate receptor 3
(GRM3); and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF)

neurochemistry (“dopamine hypothesis”): excess activity in the mesolimbic dopamine pathway may
mediate the positive symptoms of psychosis, while decreased dopamine in the prefrontal cortex may
mediate negative and cognitive symptoms. GABA, glutamate, and ACh dysfunction are also thought to
be involved

neuroanatomy: decreased frontal lobe function; asymmetric temporal/limbic function; decreased basal
ganglia function; subtle changes in thalamus, cortex, corpus callosum, and ventricles; cytoarchitectural
abnormalities

= neuroendocrinology: abnormal growth hormone, prolactin, cortisol, and ACTH

neuropsychology: global defects seen in attention, language, and memory suggest disrupted
connectivity of neural networks

environmental: indirect evidence of cannabis use, geographical variance, winter season of birth,
obstetrical complications, and prenatal viral exposure

Pathophysiology
+ neurodegenerative theory: natural history may bea rapid or gradual decline in function and ability to
communicate
= glutamate system may mediate progressive degeneration by excitotoxic mechanism which leads to
production of free radicals
+ neurodevelopmental theory: abnormal development of the brain from prenatal life
= neurons fail to migrate correctly, make inappropriate connections, and undergo apoptosis in later life

Toronto Notes 2025

)

Remington 6, Addington, HonerW,ismail
L,RaedleT, TeehanM. Guidelines forthe
Pharmacotherapy ofSchiophreniain Adu.

Can Psychiatry. 2017 Sep.62(9):604-616 doi
10:19707067437177 20448, Epub 2017 Jul 13.
PMID: 28703015; PMCID: PMC5593252.

Abstract objective: The present guidelines address
the pharmacotherapy of schizophrenia in adults acoss
different stages, phases, and symptom domains.
Method: Guidelines were developed using the ADAPTE
process, which takes advantage existing guidelines
Sixguidelines wereidentified for adaptation, wth
recommendations extracted fomeach,Forthose
specfictothe pharmacotherapy of schizaphreiain
aduts, a working group selected between guidlines
and recommendations to crate an adapted guideline.
Results: Recommendations canbe categorized into
areas thatinclude 1) fist-pisode schizophrenia,
acute exacerbation, 3) relapse prevention and
‘maintenance treatment, 4) reatmentsesistant
schizophrenia, 5) dozapne-esistant schizophrenia,
and 6) spectc symptom domains. For each category,
recommendations are made based onthe avaiable
evidence, whichis discussed andlnked to other
established guidelines.

Condusions:Inmost cases, evidence-based
recommendations are made thatcanbe used to

quide current clinical treatment and decision making,
Notably, however, theres a paucity of established
evidence to guide treatment decison making inthe
case of dazapine-resistant schizophrenia, a subsample
that represent sizable proportion of those with
‘cha ophrena

tween Durationof Untreated
Psychosis (DUP) and Outcomein Fst-pisode
Schiaophrenia

‘Am Psychiatry 2005,162:785-1808

Purpose: To review the aso cation between DUP
and symptom severity at ist treatment contact, and
between DU and treatment outcomes

Methods Critical review and meta-analysis of studies
involving patients with non-affectie psychotic
disorersator dos tofist treatment

Results: 43 studies wth 177 patients wer induded.
ShorterDUP was associated with greater response
toantipsjchotic treatment, as measured by global
15ychopathlogy, positive symptoms, negative
Symptoms, and functional outcomes tthe time of
treatment ntaton, longer DUP was associated with
the severity of negative symptoms but nat with the
severity of positive symptoms, global psychopathology,
rneurocogntiv function

Condusions: DUP maybe a potential modifiable
rognosticfact.

Disorganized Behaviours in Schizophrenia
CCatatonic stupor: fully conscious but mute,
unresponsive, immobile, and maintaining
bizarre positions for along time

Catatonic excitement: uncontrolled and
aimless motor activity, extreme agitation
Stereotypy: repeated but non-goal-directed
‘movement (ie. rocking)

Mannerisms: goal-directed activities that
are odd or out of context (i. grimacing)
Echopraxia: imitates movements and
gestures of others

‘Automatic obedience: carries out simple
‘commands in robot like fashion
‘Negativism: refuses to cooperate with
simple requests for no apparent reason
Inappropriate affect, neglect of self-care,
other odd behaviours (random shouting)

