PS39 Psychiatry

Sexual Addiction

definition: engaging in persistent and escalating patterns of sexual behaviour, despite increasing negative

consequences to self and others

+ clinical features: may be characterized by compulsive searching for multiple sexual partners, persistent
thoughts of or craving for sex to the detriment of other activities, compulsive masturbation, extensive use
of pornography, compulsive sexuality in a relationship, and feelings of remorse or guilt after sex

+ management: CBT, 12-step programs, SSRIs to reduce libido

Sexual Dysfunction

+ important to identify treatable causes (e.g. atrophic vaginitis, diabetes, antidepressant medications)
«+ see Gynecology, GY34 and Urology, U33

n

« eating disorders are characterized by a persistent disturbance of eating that impairs psychosocial
functioning or health

+ disorders include: anorexia nervosa, avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder, binge eating disorder,
bulimia nervosa, pica, and rumination disorder

Epidemiology

+ anorexia nervosa (AN): 1% of adolescent and young adult females; 0.3% males; onset in mid-teens (14-18 yr)

+ bulimia nervosa (BN): 2-4% of adolescent and young adult females; 0.5% males; onset in late teens or early
adulthood

+ E:M=10:1; mortality of AN 5-10%

* common comorbidities: depression (50-75%), substance misuse (35% in BN, 15% in AN), OCD (25% in AN)

Etiology
+ multifactorial: psychological, sociological, and biological associations
+ individual: perfectionism, lack of control in other life areas, history of sexual abuse
. personality anxiety, perfectionism, obsessionality, negative emotionality, cognitive inflexibility
+ family & sociocultural: invalidating family structure, prevalent in industrialized societies, idealization of
thinness in the media, athletic demands
+ puberty
* genetic factors
= AN: 6% prevalence in siblings with one study of twin pairs finding concordance in 9 of 12 monozygotic
pairs vs. concordance in 1 of 14 dizygotic pairs (10x greater risk among first-degree relatives)
= BN: higher familial incidence of affective disorders than the general population

Risk Factors

+ physical factors: obesity, chronic medical illness (e.g. DM)

+ psychological factors: individuals who by career choice are expected to be thin, family history (mood
disorders, eating disorders, substance use disorder), history of sexual abuse (especially for BN), competitive
athletes, concurrent associated mental illness (depression, OCD, anxiety disorder (especially panic and
agoraphobia), substance use disorder (specifically for BN))

Complications
+ growth delay, osteoporosis (40%), osteopenia (50%), cardiovascular complications (bradycardia,
QTc prolongation, starvation edema), gastrointestinal complications (e.g. irritable bowel syndrome,
constipation, gastric dilation), electrolyte disturbances (hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia,
hypophosphatemia), refeeding syndrome, and endocrine abnormalities (increased GH, reduced LH, FSH,
and T3)

Anorexia Nervosa

DSM-5 DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA FOR ANOREXIA NERVOSA
Reprinted with pemission rom the Diagnostic and Statistical Manualof Mental Disorders, Sthed. 2073. American Psychiatric Associaton

A. restriction of energy intake relative to requirements, leading to a significantly low body weight in the
context of age, sex, developmental trajectory, and physical health. Significantly low weight is defined as
a weight that is less than minimally normal or, for children and adolescents, less than that minimally
expected

B. intense fear of gaining weight or of becoming fat, or persistent behaviour that interferes with weight gain,
even though at a significantly low weight

Toronto Notes 2025

Eating Disorder Screening
Method to identify patients with eating
disorders. A "Yes" to two or more questions
is associated with a sensitivity and
specticity of 78 and 88%, respectively

SCOFF

Do you make yourself Sick because you
feel uncomfortably ful?

Do you worry you have lost Control over
how much you eat?

Have you recently lost more than One
stone (14 pounds or 6.354g) in a3 mo
period?

Do you believe yourself tobe Fatwhen
‘others say you are too thin?

Would you say that Food dominates your
lite?

Athletic Triad
Disordered eating
Amenorrhea
Osteoporosis

‘Some patients with insulin-dependent DM
‘may stop their insulin in order to lose weigh
