PSI2 Psychiatry

Depressive Disorders
MAJOR DEPRESSIVE DISORDER
DSM-5 DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA FOR MAJOR DEPRESSIVE DISORDER (MDD)

Reprinted wit permission rom the Dagnosticand Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, the. 2013. American Psychiatric Assocation
‘A. presence of a single MDE (vs. recurrent, which requires presence of two or more MDEs; to be considered
separate episodes, there must be an interval of at least 2 consecutive mo in which criteria are not met for a
MDE)

. the MDE is not better accounted for by schizoaffective disorder and is not superimposed on schizophrenia,
schizophreniform disorder, delusional disorder, or psychotic disorder NOS

. there has never been a manic episode or a hypomanic episode

Note: This exclusion does not apply if all of the manic-like, or hypomanic-like episodes are substance or
treatment-induced or are due to the direct physiological effects of another medical condition

specifiers: with anxious distress, mixed features, melancholic features, atypical features, mood-congruent
psychotic features, mood-incongruent psychotic features, catatonia, peripartum onset, seasonal pattern

J

fo)

Epidemiology
+ Canadian annual/lifetime prevalence: 5%/11%
+ peak prevalence age 15-25 yr (M:F=1:2)

Etiology
+ biological
genetic: 65-75% MZ twins; 14-19% DZ twins; 2-4 fold increased risk in first-degree relatives
neurotransmitter dysfunction: decreased activity of 5-HT, NE, and DA at neuronal synapse; changes in
GABA and glutamate; various changes detectable by {MRI
neuroendocrine dysfunction: abnormal HPA axis activity
neuroanatomy and neurophysiology: decreased hippocampal volume, increased size of ventricles;
decreased REM latency and slow-wave sleep; increased REM length
immunologic: increased pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-6 and TNF
secondary to medical condition, medication, or substance use disorder
* psychosocial
. gagnitive (i.e. distorted schemata, Beck’s cognitive triad: negative views of oneself, the world, and the
‘uture)
= environmental factors (i.e. job loss, bereavement, history of abuse or neglect, early life adversity)
= comorbid psychiatric diagnoses (i.e. anxiety, substance use disorder, developmental disability,
dementia, eating disorders)

Risk Factors

sex: F:M=2:1

family history: depression, alcohol use disorder, suicide attempt or completion

adverse childhood experiences: loss of parent before age 11, negative home environment (abuse, neglect)
personality: neurotic, insecure, dependent, obsessional

recent stressors: illness, financial, legal, relational, academic

lack of intimate and confiding relationships or social isolation

low socioeconomic status

Clinically Significant Depressive Symptoms in the Elderly

+ affects about 15% of community residents >65 y/o; up to 50% in nursing homes

high suicide risk due to social isolation, chronic medical illness, and decreased independence

suicide peaks: males ages 80-90, females ages 50-65

low mood or dysphoria may not be a reliable indicator of depression in those >70 y/o

often present with somatic complaints (i.e. changes in weight, sleep, energy; chronic pain) or anxiety
symptoms

may have prominent cognitive changes after onset of mood symptoms (dementia syndrome of depression)
see Table 3, PS26, for a comparison of delirium and dementia

Treatment

« lifestyle: supervised exercise (mild MDE), light therapy (MDE with seasonal pattern), cognitive behavioural

therapy for insomnia, sleep hygiene, healthy diet

+ biological: SSRIs, SNRIs, other antidepressants, somatic therapies (see Pharmacotherapy, PS50 and Somatic

‘Therapies, PS58)
= for MDD of moderate or greater severity, 1st line pharmacotherapy are used: most 2nd generation
antidepressants, with escitalopram, mirtazapine, sertraline, venlafaxine, agomelatine, and citalopram
showing evidence for superiority
= fornon or partial response, optimize the dose, switch to antidepressant with superiority, or add
augmenting agent (ie. aripiprazole, quetiapine, risperidone)

= typical response to antidepressant treatment: physical symptoms improve at 2 wk, mood/cognition by 4

wk; ifno improvement after 4 wk at the highest tolerated therapeutic dosage, alter regimen

Toronto Notes 2025

@

Antidepressants for Depressionin Physically
People

CochraneDB Syst Rey 2010;C0007503

Purpose: To determine theefcacy of antidepressants
intreatingdepressionin people with comorbid physical
iness,

Methods: Sytematicreview of CTs comparing

the eficacy of antidepressants. placeboin the
treatment of majo depression, adjustment disorder,
and dysthymi in adults with comorbid depression

and physical ness. Physcalillness was defined as
any medical condition known to havea biological
underpinning where diagnosis snot purely symptom
based.

Results Fitty-onestudiesincuding 3603 participants
wereincuded inthisreiew. Both tricyclic
antidepressants and selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors were more effective than placebo at treating
depression in adults with concurrent physica ess.
ry mouth and sera dysfunction were more common
inpatients treated wth an antidepressant

‘See Landmark Psychiatry Trials table for
‘more information on the STAR‘D trial,
which investigates the effectiveness of
‘successive treatment steps of medication +
psychotherapy in adults with MDD
