PS43 Psychiatry

Table 10. Description and Diagnosis of Personality Disorders

Toronto Notes 2025

‘Schizoid Personality Disorder (35% of general population)

Neither desires nor enjoys close relationships induding being a partofa family prefers to be alone. Lifelong patter of social withdrawal. Seen as eccentric and recisive with restricted affect in a variety of contexts

Diagnosisrequires 4+ of: DISTANT
1. Detachediiat affect, emotionally cold

2. Indifferentto praise or criticism

3. Sexual experiencesof litle interest

4. Tasks done salitaily

5. Absence of close frends other than first degreerrelatves)

6. Neither desires nor enjoysclose relationships (including family)
Takes pleasurein few if any) activites

‘Cluster B:“Bad” Personality Disorders
Patients seem dramatic, emotional, inconsistent, and impulsive

Sensitiveto perceived citcism, abandonment, or lackof attention; difcuty with interpersonal relationships due to self-serving, hostile, or erratic behaviour

Familial association with mood disorders

Common defense mechanisms: denial, acting ou, regression histrinic PO), splitting (borderline PO), projectiveidentification,idealization/devaluation

Borderline Personality Disorder (1-2% of general population)
Apervasivepattem of instability of interpersonal relationships, sel Amage, and affects; marked impulsivity
‘Strong correlation witha history of childhood sexual abuse. Characterized by interpersonal cognitive,
behavioural, and affective deficits. Often expasedto anemotionally invalidating environment. The more dramatic
behaviour tendsto diminish aspatientsage, DT s the principal treatment (see Psychotherapy, PS48)

“10% suicderate™*

Diagnosis requires 5+: IMPULSIVE

4. Impulsive (minimum of 2 self-damaging ways, e.g. sexdrugs/spending)

2.Moodiaffect instability

3. Paranoia or dissociation under stress

4. Unstableselt-image

5. Labil intense relationship extremes of idealization and devaluation)

6 Suicidal gesturesisel-harm

‘TL Inappropriateanger

8,Voiding abandonment (real or imagined, fanticeffortst)

9, Emptiness (elings ol)

(Note: More frequently diagnosed in females butresearchsuggests equal gender distribution)

Antisocial Personality Disorder (M: 2-4, F:0.5:73)
Lackofremorse for actions, manipulative and decetul, often volte the lw. May appear charming onfirst
impression. Pervasive pattern of disregard for others and violation of others'rghts mustbe present before age
41; however, forthe lagnosisof ASP, patientsmustbe at least 8. Musthave evidence of conduc disorder
before age15; history oftrauma/abuse common see Child Psychiatry, S44)

Diagnosisrequires 3 of: CORRUPT

4. Cannot conform to law andor socal norms (repeated illegal acts)

2. Obligations ignored irresponsible)

3. Reckless disregard for safety of self or others

4 Remorseless

5. Underhanded (deceitful conning othersfor persona proto pleasure)

6. Planning insufficient (impulsive)

Temper irtable ndaggressve)

Narcissistic Personality Disorder (around 6% of general population)
needs constant admiration, lacks empathy, but with ragile sense of self. Consider
nd will exploit others for personal gin. Begining by earlyaduthood andpresentin a

variety of contexts
Diagnosisrequires 5+ of: GRANDIOSE

1. Grandiose sense of sel-importance eg. exaggerates achievements and talents)
2. Requires excessiveadniration

3.Artogant

4. Needs tobe special and associate with other special or high-status people)

5. Dreams of success, power, beauty, lve (preoccupied with these fantasies)

6 .Interpersonally exploitative

1 Others (lacks empathy, unable to recognize feeingsineeds of others)

8.Sense ofentitlement

4. Envious or believes others are envious)

Histrionic Personality Disorder (2% of general population)
‘tention-seeking behaviour and excesively emotional. Are dramatic lamboyant, and extroverted Cannot form
meaningful relationships Often sexually inappropriate, Diagnosed more in females but studies suggest equal
prevalence

Diagnosisrequires Sof: ACTRESSS

1. Appearanceusedto attrac attention

2.Centreof attention ese uncomfortable

3 Theatrical

4 Relationships (believed to be more intimate than they ae)

5. Easily ifluenced

6 Seductive behaviour

. Shallow expression of emotions (which rapidly shift)

8 Speech impressionistic and vague)

Cluster C: “Sad” Personality Disorders
Patients seem anxious, fearful

Familial association with anxiety disorder

Common defense mechanisms: isolation, avoidance, bypochondriasis

‘Avoidant Personality Disorder (2.4% of general population)

Timid and socially awkward witha pervasive sense of inadequacy, social inhibition, and hypersensitivity to
criticism. Fear of embarrassing or humiliating themselves in socal situations so remain withdrawn and socially
inhibited

Diagnosisrequires 4 of: CRINGES

4. Criticism or rejection preoccupies thoughts insoca situations

2. Restraint in relationships de to fear of being shamed

3. Inhibited innew relationships due to fear of inadequacy

4. Needs to be sure of being liked before engaging socially

5. Gets around occupational activities requiring interpersonal contact

6. Embarrassment prevents new activity ortakingrisks

1. Self-viewed as unappealing or inferior

Dependent Personality Disorder (0.5-0.6% of general population)

Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder (2.1-7.9%)

Preoccupation with orderliness, perfectionism, and mental and interpersonal contro. ls inflexible, closed-off, and
inefficient. Highly comorbid with mood/anxiety and eating disorders

Diagnosistequires 4 of: SCRIMPER
4. Stubborn

2.Cannet discard worthless objects
3.Ruleldetal obsessed (to pointofact
4 Inflexiblein matters of morality, ethics, values

5. Miserly

6 Perfectionist tothe extentthat it hampers task completion
1 Exdudes leisure due to devotion towork

8. Reluctant to delegate to others

Pervasive and excessive need tobe takencare of, excessive fear of separation, cinging and submissive behavious. Difficulty making everyday decisions. Useful to set aregulated treatment schedule (regular bref visits) and being

firm about it inbetween issues. Encourage patient to do more for themselves, engage in own problem-solving
Diagnosis requires S+of: RELIANCE

4 Reassurance and/or advice required for everyday decisions (excessive)

2. Expressing disagreement difficult

3. Life responsibilities assumed by others

4. Intiatingprojects dificult (because lack of self-confidence)

5. Alone (feelshelpless and uncomfortable when alone)

6.Murturance (goes to excessive lengths to obtain)

T.Companionship sought urgently

8. Exaggerated fers ofbeing lett tocarefor self

