PS19 Psychiatry Toronto Notes 2025

+ phobic object/situation is actively avoided or endured with intense anxiety

+ fear/anxiety out of proportion to actual danger/sociocultural context and persistent (lasting 6 mo or more)

+ person recognizes fear as excessive or unreasonable

+ significant impact on daily routine, occupational/social functioning, and/or marked distress

Treatment

+ psychological: psychoeducation, CBT (focusing on both in vivo and virtual exposure therapy, gradually
facing feared situations)

+ biological: minimal role for medications

sessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders

Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder

DSM-5 DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA FOR OBSESSIVE-COMPULSIVE DISORDER
Reprinted with pemission rom the Diagnostic and Statistical Manualof Mental Disorders, Sth ed. 2013. American Psychiatric Association

A. presence of obsessions, compulsions, or both
= obsessions are defined by (1) and (2)

1. recurrent and persistent thoughts, urges, or images that are experienced, at some time during the
disturbance, as intrusive and unwanted, and that in most individuals cause marked anxiety or
distress

2. the individual attempts to ignore or Suppress such thoughts, urges, or images, or to neutralize them
with some other thought or action (i.e. by performing a compulsion)

= compulsions are defined by (1) and (2)

1, repetitive behaviours (e.g. hand washing, ordering, checking) or mental acts (e.g. praying, counting,
repeating words silently) that the individual feels driven to perform in response to an obsession or
according to rules that must be applied rigidly

2. the behaviours or mental acts are aimed at preventing or reducing anxiety or distress, or preventing
some dreaded event or situation; however, these behaviours or mental acts are not connected in a
realistic way with what they are designed to neutralize or prevent or are clearly excessive

B, the obsessions or compulsions are time-consuming (e.g. take >1 h/d) or cause clinically significant distress
or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning

C. the obsessive-compulsive symptoms are not attributable to the physiological effects

D. the disturbance is not better explained by the symptoms of another mental disorder

+ specifiers: with good or fair insight, with poor insight, with absent insight/delusional beliefs, tic-related

+ most common obsessions: contamination fear, pathological doubts, harm (e.g. sex, aggression), somatic
dysfunctions, need for symmetry, religious
most common compulsions: checking, washing, repeating, ordering, counting, need to ask, and hoarding

+ rituals serve to counteract the anxiety induced by the obsessive thoughts

Epidemiology

+ lifetime prevalence 3%

+ mean age of onset: 20 yr; onset after 35 yr rare

+ rate of OCD in first-degree relatives is higher than in the general population

+ common comorbidities: anxiety disorders (>75%), depressive or bipolar disorder (>60%), obsessive-
compulsive PD, tic disorders, substance use disorder, body dysmorphic disorder, trichotillomania, and
excoriation disorder

Risk Factors
+ etiology unknown but linked with:
= neurological abnormalities: neurological dysfunction (i.e. brain injury, Sydenham’s or Huntington's
chorea), abnormal EEG, and abnormal evoked auditory potentials
family history of OCD or Tourette’s disorder
= pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorders associated with streptococcal infection (PANDAS) in
children following group A B-streptococcal infection; also linked to D8/17 antigen positivity
= social isolation, physical abuse, negative emotionality

Treatment

CBT: ERP which involves exposure to feared situations using various techniques (e.g. imaginal exposure,
systematic desensitization, flooding) with the addition of preventing the compulsive behaviours; cognitive
strategies include challenging underlying beliefs

pharmacotherapy: SSRIs (12-16 wk potential delay until response, higher therapeutic dosages than used
for depression, benign side effects), clomipramine; adjunctive antipsychotics (risperidone, aripiprazole) for
refractory OCD

neurosurgery or neurostimulation: anterior cingulotomy for severe refractory OCD, two techniques:
radiofrequency thermolesion and gamma knife capsulotomy or cingulotomy (50-70% response rate); ECT
(particularly for those with comorbid severe depression)

Prognosis
+ may be refractory and chronic with waxing and waning symptoms (<20% remission rate without
treatment)
