MIL

Abdominal Imaging

‘Medical Imaging

Abdominal X-Ray

Indications

+ acute abdomen: bowel perforation, toxic megacolon, bowel ischemia, small bowel obstruction, large bowel
obstruction

chronic symptoms: constipation, calcifications (gallstones, renal stones, urinary bladder stones, etc.)
not useful in: GI bleeds, chronic anemia, vague GI symptoms

Anatomy
+ the abdomen is divided into 2 cavities:

= peritoneal cavity: lined by peritoneum that wraps around most of the bowel, the spleen, and most of the

liver; forms a recess lateral to both the ascending and descending colon (paracolic gutters)

= retroperitoneal cavity: contains several organs situated posterior to the peritoneal cavity; the contour of

these can often be seen on radiographs

Table 7. Differentiating Small and Large Bowel

Property ‘Small Bowel Large Bowel

Mucosal Folds Uninterrupted valvulae conniventes (or plicae Interrupted haustra extend only partway acoss lumen
circulates)

Location Central Peripheral (picture frame)

Maximum Diameter 3cm 6 cm @cmat cecum)

Maximum Fold Thickness 3mm 5mm

Other Rarely contain slid fecal material Commonly contains solidfeca material

Approach to Abdominal X-Ray
+ mnemonic: “Free ABDO”
+ “Free”: free air and fluid
« free fluid
small amounts of fluid: increased distance between lateral fat stripes and adjacent colon may

indicate free peritoneal fluid in the paracolic gutters

+ large amounts of fluid: diffuse increased opacification on supine film; bowel floats to centre of

anterior abdominal wall

* ascites and blood (hemoperitoneum) are the same density on the radiograph and cannot be

differentiated

« free intraperitoneal air suggests rupture of a hollow viscus (anterior duodenum, transverse colon, etc.),
penetrating trauma, or recent (<7 d) surgery
+ “A”: air in the bowel (can be normal, ileus, or obstruction)
= volvulus - twisting of the bowel upon itself resulting in obstruction; from most to least common:

1

3.
4,
5.

sigmoid: massively dilated sigmoid projects to right or mid-upper abdomen with proximal

dilation (“coffee bean” sign)

. cecal: massively dilated bowel loop projecting to left or mid-upper abdomen with small bowel
dilation, where the twisted bowel loops appear narrowed (“bird’s beak” sign)

. gastric: rare
transverse colon: rare (usually in younger individuals)

. small bowel: “corkscrew” sign (rarely diagnosed on plain films, seen best on CT), and “whirlpool”
sign describing the twisting of mesenteric vessels and small bowel loops

= toxic megacolon
« manifestation of fulminant colitis
+ extreme dilatation of colon (>6.5 cm) with mucosal changes (e.g. foci of edema, ulceration,

pseudopolyps) and loss of normal haustral pattern

+ “B’: bowel wall thickening
= increased soft tissue density in bowel wall, thumb-like indentations in bowel wall (“thumb-printing”),
ora picket-fence appearance of the valvulae conniventes (“stacked coin” appearance)
= may be seen in IBD, infection, ischemia, hypoproteinemic states, and submucosal hemorrhage
+ “D”: densities
= bones: look for gross abnormalities of lower ribs, vertebral column, and bony pelvis
= abnormal calcifications: approach by location

.
.
.
.
.

.

RUQ: renal stone, adrenal calcification, gallstone, porcelain gallbladder
RLQ: ureteral stone, appendicolith, gallstone ileus

LUQ: renal stone, adrenal calcification, tail of pancreas

LLQ: ureteral stone

central: aorta/aortic aneurysm, pancreas, lymph nodes

pelvis: phleboliths (i. calcified veins), uterine fibroids, bladder stones
+ “0”: organs
= kidney, liver, gallbladder, spleen, pancreas, urinary bladder, psoas shadow
= outlines can occasionally be identified because they are surrounded by more lucent fat, but all are best
visualized with other imaging modalities (CT, MRI)

Toronto Notes 2025

3 Views of AXR
ErectiUpright
Supine

Left lateral decubitus

3-6-9 Rule of Dilation
‘Small bowel 3 cm)
Large bowel >6 cm)
Cecum (>9 cm)
