MI29 ‘Medical Imaging

+ high-risk screening

= known BRCAI or BRCA2 mutation, or other gene predisposing to breast cancer, or untested first-degree
relative of a carrier of such a gene mutation

«= family history consistent with a hereditary breast cancer syndrome and/or estimated personal lifetime
cancer risk >25%

= high-risk marker on prior biopsy (atypical ductal hyperplasia, atypical lobular hyperplasia, lobular
carcinoma in situ)

« radiation therapy to chest (before age 30)

Breast Diagnostic and Interventional Procedures

Description
+ includes core needle biopsy, stereotactic biopsy, MRI-guided biopsy, abscess drainage, and cyst aspiration

Indications

+ cystic mass: complex cyst, symptomatic, suspected abscess

+ solid mass: confirm diagnosis of a lesion suspicious for malignancy (BI-RADS" Category 4 or 5)

+ suspicious calcifications: confirm diagnosis of a lesion suspicious for malignancy (BI-RADS* Category 4 or
5) - stereotactic biopsy

+ initial percutaneous biopsy procedure that was insufficient or discordant with imaging

+  presurgical wire localization of a lesion

Breast Findings

Breast Masses

+ definition: a space-occupying lesion seen in two different projections; if seen in onlya single projection it
should be called an “asymmetry” until its three-dimensionality is confirmed

Table 20. Mammographic Features of Benign and Malignant Breast Masses

Benign Malignant

Shape ‘val, round, lobular Ireguar

Margin Circumscribed, well-defined Indistinct, miaolobulated,spiculted

Density Radilucent(cilcyt lipoma, firolipama,galactocele,  Radiodense
hamartoma)

Calcifications (¢ mass) Popcorn (hyalnizing broadenoma), lucent centred of Pleomorphic (vayin sie and shape), amorphous
‘ystifatnecosis, layering (ilkof calcium), vascular, (indistinct), fie lnear, coarse heterogeneous,
round, scattered regional, segmental, dustered

Other Findings

+ tubular density/dilated duct: branching tubular structures usually represent enlarged ducts (milk duct:
they are clearly identified as such, these densities are of little concern

+ intramammary lymph node: typical lymph nodes are well-circumscribed, reniform and often have a fatty
notch and centre; usually <1 cm, and usually seen in the outer, often upper part of the breast; when these
characteristics (particularly fatty centre or notch) are well seen, the lesion is almost always benign and
insignificant

+ focal asymmetry: area of breast density with similar shape on two views, but completely lacking borders
and conspicuity of a true mass; must be carefully evaluated with focal compression to exclude findings of a
true mass or architectural distortion

+ if focal compression shows mass-like character - or if the area can be palpated — biopsy generally
recommended

Landmark Radiology Trials

Toronto Notes 2025

Tal Name Reference Clinical Trial Details
VASCULAR PROCEDURES
REPIC NEJM 1998;338:409-416 Purpose: To study the efficacy and safety of vena caval itersin preventing the formation of PEs inpatientswith proximal DVT.

Methods: RCT consisting of 400 patients with proximal DVT who were randomizedto receive heparinin conjunctionwith either a cava ite o no filter.
Results: 2 patients within the treatment group and 9 patients within the contrl group had experienced a PE within 12d. 37 patients within the treatment group and 21 patients,

within the control group experienced recurrent DVT within 2.

Conclusion: Benefits of vena cava ters were counterbalanced by ther risks. Filters resulted inno significant difference in mortalty or other outcomes and although they

prevented PE within 124, they increased the risk of recurrent DVT within 2.

EVAR NEJM 2010;362:1863-1871 Purpose: To understand the long term implications of endovascular repair of abdominal aortic aneurysms.

Methods: RCT consisting of 1252 patients with abdominal aortic aneurysmswere randomized to undergoan endovascular or open repair. The outcomes of interestincluded

mortality, raft-related compications, and re-iter ventions.

Results: The 30d postoperative mortality was lower in the endovascular repair group (1.8% vs. 4.3%). However, due to graft ruptures, themortalit rates equilibrated over

time. The rates of graft-related complicationsand re-interventions were higher inthe goupthat underwent endovascular repai

Conclusion: Mortality at 30d post-operation was significantly lower for endovascular repair compared to open repair. tthe end offolow-up (5-10 yr), therewas no significant

difference inmortalityand rates of complication were higher inthe endovascular treatment group.

