NP3 ‘Nephrology

Table 1. Major Kidney Functions

Function Mechanism Affected Elements

1.Waste Excretion ‘lomeruar filtration Excretion of nitrogenous products of protein
metabolism (urea, C)

Tubular secretion Excretion of organic acids (urate) andoorganic

2. Electrolyte Balance and Osmoregulation

3. Hormonal Synthesis,

4. Blood Pressure Regulation

5. Glucose Homeostasis

Tubular catabolism

Tubular NaCl and water reabsorption
Tubular K’ secretion
Tubular Ht secretion

HCO> synthesis and reabsorption
Tubular Ca", Mg", POc> transport
Osmolyte synthesis

Erythropoietin production cortex)

Vitamin D activation: 25(0H) Vitamin D converted to 125,08)
Vitamin D (proximal tubule)

Renin production (juxtaglomerular apparatus)

Nav excretion

Renin production

‘luconeogenesis(fromlactate, pyruvate, and amino acids)
Clearance and degradation of circulating insulin

bases (1)

Breakdown and excetion of drugs (antibiotics,
diuretics) and peptide hormones (most pituitary
hormones, insulin, glucagon)

Controls volume status and osmolar balance
Controls potassium concentration
‘Acid-base balance

‘Acid-base balance

‘AtersCa®, Mg? PO? homeostasis

Increase osmolality of medullary cytoplasm tomatch
medulary concentration gradient

Redblood cell production
Cakiumhomeostasis

‘Activates renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system,
‘which affects ECF volume and vascularresistance

‘AttersECF voume

‘Atters vascular resistance

Glucose supply mantainedinprolongedstarvation
Maintains glucose homeostasis

The Glomerulus

space

site where blood constituents are filtered through to the kidney tubules for excretion or reabsorption
filtration occurs across the glomerular filtration barrier (endothelium, GBM, podocytes) into Bowman's

the filtration barrier has both a size and a charge component; restricts passage of larger molecules (e.g.

molecular weight larger than 5000 daltons) and especially of negatively charged molecules (e.g. albumin)

1. mesangial cells

consists of following cell types:

— structural function: support glomerular capillaries; can alter GFR through contractile

activity

— secretory function: matrix components, pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines, and

chemokines

— secretions are responsible for minimizing the accumulation of macromolecules in the

mesangial space and GBM
2. capillary endothelial cells

— part of the glomerular filtration barrier; help form the plasma filtration apparatus due to
their fenestrated nature and glycocalyx; contribute to the production of the GBM

— interface with blood - target for antibodies and contact site for neutrophils and
lymphocytes

3. visceral cells (podocytes)

— part of the glomerular filtration barrier; helps form the plasma filtration apparatus due to
their interdigitated foot process forming slit diaphragms; contribute to the production of
extracellular matrix proteins (collagen and laminin) making up the GBM

4, parietal cells
— lines the interior of Bowman's capsule and contains a podocyte progenitor population
5, juxtaglomerular cells

— smooth muscle cells in the lining of afferent arteriole, adjacent to the macula densa cells in

the distal tubule; produce, store, and secrete renin

Toronto Notes 2025
