M3 Medical Imaging Toronto Notes 2025

caution: bone tumours that do not elicit osteoblastic response are often occult on bone scan (myeloma,
highly vascular tumours such as RCC, or thyroid carcinoma)

Approach to Bone X-Rays

identification: name, MRN, age of patient, type of study, region of investigation. Age is very important in
choosing correct differential diagnosis.

soft tissues: swelling, calcification/ossification, loss of soft tissue planes

joints: alignment, joint space, presence of effusion, osteophytes, erosions, proliferative bony changes, bone
density, overall pattern, symmetry of affected joint

bone: periosteum, cortex, medulla, trabeculae, density, articular surfaces, bone destruction, bone
production, appearance of the edges or borders of any lesions

Figure 40. X-ray findings of first
carpometacarpal joint: normal
image (left) and osteoarthritis (right)
Trauma with joint space narrowing and
subchondral sclerosis

Fracture/Dislocation

+ description of fractures

« site of fracture (bone, region of bone, intra-articular vs. extra-articular)

pattern of fracture line (simple vs. comminuted)

displacement (distal fragment with reference to the proximal fragment)

soft tissue involvement (calcification, gas, foreign bodies)

type of fracture (stress vs. pathologic)

for specific fracture descriptions and characteristics, see Orthopedic Surgery, ORS

Arthritis
+ see Rheumatology for radiographic features of specific arthritides

Bone and Soft Tissue Tumours

Bone Tumours

. penign bone lesions (e.g. hemangiomas, enostoses, enchondromas) are more common than malignant bone
lesions

primary bone tumours are rare after 3rd decade; metastases to bone are relatively common after 3rd decade
+ MRlis helpful for detection, characterization, staging, soft tissue involvement, and surgical planning

+ plain film is important for assessing pattern of destruction, mineralization, and aggressiveness.
Remember: zone of transition, periosteal reaction, presence of soft tissue mass and cortical destruction in Figure 41. X-ray findings of

all focal lesions to determine if lesion is aggressive or not aggressive. Benign processes such as Langerhans _Meumatoid arthritis (A) compared
cell histiocytosis and infection can be aggressive with osteoarthritis (B)
biopsy may be required if no primary is identified, or suspect primary bone tumour

may present with pathological fractures or bone pain

most common metastatic bone tumours: breast, prostate, lung

for specific bone tumours, see Orthopedic Surgery, OR50

Soft Tissue Tumours
+ soft tissue masses are most commonly benign
+ common benign soft tissue masses include lipomas, benign peripheral nerve sheath tumours, and vascular
malformations
soft tissue sarcomas are uncommon but require urgent workup and specialized treatment
U/Sis helpful for differentiating lipoma from cyst from mass
MRlis helpful for diagnostic workup
if the mass is not clearly benign, biopsy or wide excision is required for diagnosis

Margination Patterns of cortical Patterns of medullary _—_—Pericstealnew
of lesions disturbance destruction bone formation
e ©
\ pared Expansile Permeative
” ‘ be decreased density
i = increased density
Endosteal
Thin im ot sealoping
sclerosis
Invisible
margin
= Moth-eaten
Thickrimot l a
sceoss 4

Figure 42. Radiographic appearance of bone remodeling and destruction processes
