MU3 Medical Imaging

Approach to Abdominal Computed Tomography

+ look through all images in gestalt fashion to identify any obvious abnormalities
+ look at each organ or structure individually, from top to bottom, evaluating the size and shape of each area
of increased or decreased density

+ evaluate the following:

= soft tissue window

+ liver, gallbladder, spleen, and pancreas

adrenals, kidneys, ureters, and bladder
stomach, duodenum, small bowel mesentery, and colon/appendix
retroperitoneum (aorta, vena cava, and mesenteric vessels; look for adenopathy in vicinity of
vessels)

* peritoneal cavity for fluid or masses

+ abdominal wall and adjacent soft tissue
= lung window

+ visible lung (ba
= bone window

* vertebrae, spinal cord, and bony pelvis

eee

es)

Gallbladder Small bowel
Head of the pancreas ‘ Spleen
Liver Bey S Leftkidney
Right kidney
Blood vessels
a. Aorta

Right crus of diaphragm 1 . b. Inferior vena cava

Vertebra / . Superior mesenteric vein

d. Superior me

Erector spinae muscles ~ e. Leftrenal ar

Figure 19. Axial abdominal computed tomography

CT and Bowel Obstruction

+ cause of bowel obstruction is rarely found on plain films; CT is the best imaging modality

+ the “3,6,9” rule is a very useful guide for determining when the bowel is dilated; the maximum diameter for
the small bowel is 3 cm, for large bowel is 6 cm, and for cecum is 9 cm; this can also be useful to distinguish
small and large bowel, and to assess for ‘impending’ cecal perforation (e.g. post-untreated Ogilvie’s
syndrome)

+ closed-loop obstruction: an obstruction in two locations (usually small bowel) creating a loop of bowel
obstructed both proximally and distally; complications (e.g. ischemia, perforation, necrosis) may occur
quickly

CT Colonography (Virtual Colonoscopy)

+ emerging imaging technique for evaluation of intraluminal colonic masses (i.e. polyps, tumours)

+ two CT scans of the abdomen (prone and supine) after the instillation of carbon dioxide into a prepped
colon

+ computer reconstruction of 2D CT images into a 3D intraluminal view of the colon

+ lesions seen on 3D images correlated with 2D axial images

+ indications: surveillance in low-risk patients, incomplete colonoscopy, or staging of obstructing colonic
lesions

Toronto Notes 2025
