MI22 ‘Medical Imaging
= DDx: infarct, tumour, status epilepticus, limbic encephalitis
+ cerebritis/cerebral abscess
= pathogenesis: an infection of the brain parenchyma (cerebritis) which can progress to a collection of
pus (abscess), most frequently due to hematogenous spread of infectious organisms, commonly located
in the distribution of the MCA
= pathogens include: S. aureus (often in IV drug users, nosocomial), Streptococcus, Gram negative
bacteria, Bacteroides
= best imaging modality: MRI including DWI imaging series (abscess will be DWI positive); CT still used
asa viable alternative
= findings according to one of four stages of abscess formation:
early cerebritis (1-3 d): inflammatory infiltrate with necrotic centre, low intensity on T1, high
intensity on T2
late cerebritis (4-9 d): ring enhancement may be present
early capsule (10-13 d): ring enhancement
late capsule (>14 d): well demarcated ring-enhancing lesion, low intensity core, with mass effect;
considerable edema around the lesion, seen as hyperintensity on T2

.

eee

usculoskeletal System

Modalities
+ see Imaging Modalities, MI2 for advantages and disadvantages of the following:

Plain Film/X-Ray

+ usually initial study used in evaluation of bone and joint disorders

+ indications: arthritis, fractures and dislocations, assessment of malunion or nonunion, orthopedic
hardware, and bone lesions (initial)

+ minimum of two orthogonal views (usually AP and lateral) image the joint proximal and distal to injury
site to ensure there is no associated dislocation or second fracture site, particularly important with bony
rings (e.g. radius/ulna, tibia/fibula). Image joint above and below in bone lesions, especially if primary, to
look for skip lesions

+ oblique views are helpful in trauma to look for subtle fractures

soft tissue ment limited, but can identify calcification, hydroxyapatite deposition, ossification,

swelling, joint effusions (elbow, knee, and ankle), soft tissue gas (osteomyelitis, necrotizing fasciitis), and

radiodense foreign bodies

cT

evaluation of fine bony detail

indications: preoperative assessment of complex, comminuted, intra-articular fractures, or detection of
radiographically-occult fractures including scaphoid, skull, spine, pelvis, midfoot, and calcaneus
evaluation of soft tissue calcification/ossification and bone tumours

MRI

indications: evaluation of internal derangement of joints (e.g. ligaments, joint capsule, menisci, labrum,
cartilage), assessment of tendons and muscle injuries, characterization and staging of soft tissue and bony
masses, infection of bone (osteomyelitis), occult fracture assessment

whole body MRI is used to assess CRMO and enthesitis related arthritis in pediatrics, myeloma in adults,
metastases (i.e. myxoid liposarcomas)

Ultrasound

+ indications: tendon injury (e.g. rotator cuff, Achilles tendon), detection and characterization of soft tissue
masses (i.e. cystic or solid), detection of foreign bodies, U/S-guided biopsy and injections, bone/joint

evaluation pre- ossification (e.g. DDH in early months), dynamic imaging (i.e. snapping hip, extensor carpi

ulnaris subluxation), small joint Doppler assessment for arthritis, assessment of nerves (e.g. cubital or

carpal tunnel syndrome)

in post injury or post operative setting where metallic objects or foreign debris obscure soft tissues in CT or

MRI, if superficial enough, can be assessed on ultrasound

+ doppler determines vascularity of structures

Nuclear Medicine (Primarily Bone Scan/Skeletal Scintigraphy)

+ determines the location and extent of bony lesions using radiopharmaceuticals (*mTc-methylene
diphosphonate)

+ increased binding when increased blood supply to bone and/or high bone turnover (active osteoblasts)

+ indications: bone lesion characterization, occult fractures (spine, scaphoid, small bones), bone pain of
unknown origin, staging or restaging of cancer with bony metastases (or primary bone cancer), imaging of
polyarthritis, imaging of arthroplasty complications like loosening or infection, osteomyelitis imaging

= when used to assess for osteomyelitis, usually done in combination with gallium or white blood cell
scan

+ DDx of positive bone scan: bone metastases (primary breast, prostate, lung, thyroid), primary bone tumour,

arthritis, fracture, infection, anemia, Paget’s disease

Toronto Notes 2025

Figure 38. T2-weighted (FLAIR)
coronal image of herpes simplex
virus encephalitis affecting temporal
lobes

Figure 39. CT image of late capsule
cerebral abscess

Well-demarcated smooth ring-enhancing lesion
‘on CT with contrast, with mass effect and

edema surrounding the lesion
Case courtesy of Frank Gaillard, Radiopaedia.org,r1D:5150

Characterization of Rotator Cut Tears: Ultrasound
¥s. MagneticResonance maging

Orthopedics 2017401240130

Purpose: Determine whether USor MRIs more
accurate and precise in evahating the characteristics of
{ul thickness rotator cuftarsin surgical population.
Methods: Review of patients who underwent repait
cau thickness rotator uf tear overa ty period. Of
these patients, 6thadboth preoperative MRI and UIS
forreview. Thre radiologists evaluated each US and
lina randomized, blinded fashion on 2ocasions.
Tear size, retraction status, muscle atrophy, and fatty
inftraton were anayzed and compared between the
2modalies

Results: US measurements were statistically smallerin
both tearsze P=0.001) and retraction status (20.007)
compared with MRI MR showed greater interobserver
relat assessment of terse, reaction statis,
and atrophy.

Conclusion: independent observers are more likely to
agree on measurements ofthe characteristic of rotator
cafftearswhen using MRI compared with US As tear
size increases, the 2image modalties show greater
ditferencesin measurement ofteasize and retraction
status. US may be best sed to identify tear, and MRI
i superior for usein surgical planning for larger teas
