NP7 ‘Nephrology

2. pH
+ urine pH is normally between 4.5-8.0; if persistently alkaline, consider
= RTA (types I-IV)
= UTI with urease-producing bacteria (e.g. Proteus)

3. Glucose
+ freely filtered at glomerulus and reabsorbed in proximal tubule
+ causes of glycosuria include:
1. hyperglycemia >9-11.1 mmol/L leads to filtration that exceeds tubular resorption capacity
2. increased GFR (e.g. pregnancy: the proximal convoluted tubule is unable to reabsorb the glucose and
amino acids)
3. proximal tubule dysfunction (e.g. Fanconi’s syndrome)
4, sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitors (i.e. -flozin drugs) which are prescribed for DM2;
lower the threshold for glucosuria by preventing glucose reabsorption from the filtrate

4. Protein

+ urine dipstick only detects albumin, other proteins (e.g. Bence-Jones (monoclonal light chains),
immunoglobulins, Tamm-Horsfall) may be missed

dipstick protein measurement is a concentration of protein, therefore may have overestimation of degree

of proteinuria if the urine is very concentrated, and an underestimation of the degree of proteinuria if the

urine is very dilute

urine dipstick often negative in patients with low amounts of albumin excretion (microalbuminuria,

i.e. ACR of 3.0-30 mg/mmol); gold standard for proteinuria remains 24 h timed urine collection for total

protein; always order 24 h urine creatinine as well, to confirm completeness of 24h urine collection

microalbuminuria (morning ACR of 2.0-20 mg/mmol) is not detected by standard dipstick; greater than

these ranges would be macroalbuminuria

gold standard: 24 h timed urine collection for total protein

urine PCR and ACR can estimate proteinuria and albuminuria respectively. To approximate 24 h urine

albumin excretion, multiply ACR by 10 for women and by 15 for men

5. Leukocyte Esterase

+ enzyme found in WBC and detected by dipstick

. presence of WBCs indicates infection (e.g. UTI) or inflammation along the urinary tract including prostate,
ladder, ureter, pelvis, and renal interstitium (e.g. AIN)

6. Nitrites
+ endogenous nitrates in urine are converted to nitrites by some bacteria (most commonly E. coli)
+ high specificity but low sensitivity for UTI

7. Ketones
+ positive in alcoholic/diabetic ketoacidosis, prolonged starvation, fasting

8. Hemoglobin

+ positive in hemoglobinuria (hemolysis), myoglobinuria (rhabdomyolysis), and true hematuria (RBCs seen
on microscopy)

Urine Microscopy

Table 2. Comparison of Urinary Sediment Findings

‘Active Sediment = Suggestive of Parenchymal Bland Sediment= Less Likely Parenchymal Kidney
Kidney Disease Disease
‘Any one or more ofthe following seen on microscopy Red cell casts Only hyaline casts
White cell casts ‘Small quantities of crystals
Muddy-brown granular or epithelial cell casts Small amount of bacteria
>2 ed cells per HPF <2 red cells per HPF
>4 white cells per HPF <4 white cells per HPF
41. CELLS
Erythrocytes

+ hematuria >3 RBCs per HPF
+ dysmorphic RBCs and/or RBC casts suggest glomerular origin (e.g. proliferative GN)
+ isomorphic RBCs and no casts suggest extraglomerular bleeding (e.g. bladder cancer)

Leukocytes

+ pyuria = greater than upper limit of normal: >4 WBCs per HPF

+ indicates inflammation or infection

+ ifpersistent sterile pyuria present (i.e. negative culture), consider: chronic urethritis, prostatitis, interstitial
nephritis, calculi, allergic cystitis, interstitial cystitis, papillary necrosis, renal tuberculosis, viral
infections, N. gonorrhoeae, C. trachomatis infection

Toronto Notes 2025

24h Urine Collection
Discard first morning specimen

Collect al subsequent urine for the next
24h

Refrigerate between voids

Collect second morning specimen

Positive dipstick for leukocyte esterase
‘and nitrites is highly spedifc for diagnosing
autl

Nitrite Negative Bacteria
Enterococci
Stophylococci

Nitrite Positive Bacteria (usually Gram
negative bacteria)
Enterobacteriaceae (e9. E. col)
