G27 Gastroenterology

Diagnosis

Table 16. Rome IV Criteria for Diagnosing Irritable Bowel Syndrome

TBS Rome IV Criteria

Recurrent abdominal pan for more than 6 mo, at least1diw inthe last 3 mo, associated with 2or more ofthe following:
1. Related to defecation
2. Associatedwith a change in frequency of stool
3. Associated with a change inform appearance) of stool

‘Symptom onset at least 6 mobefore diagnosisand citria present during the last 3 mo

Thefollowingare supportive, butnot essential tothe agnosis:
‘Abnormal stool frequency (34 or <3/wk)
‘Abnormal stool form (umpy/hard/loase/watery >1/40f defecations
‘Abnormal stool passage (straining, urgency feeling of incomplete evacuation) >14 of defecations
Passage of mucus >14 of defecations

Bloating

Diagnosis of BS Less Likely in Presence of “Red Flag” Features

Weight ss nena

Fever Blood or pusin stool

Noctumal defecation ‘Nonomal goss findingson endoscopy

Normal Physical Exam

Investigations

+ ifhistory consistent with Rome IV criteria, no alarm symptoms, and no family history of IBD or colorectal
cancer, limited investigations required

aim is to rule out diseases which mimic IBS, particularly celiac disease and IBD

investigations can be limited to CBC and celiac serology in many patients

ifavailable, fecal calprotectin is likely more reliable test to rule out IBD

consider TSH, and/or stool cultures depending on clinical circumstances

consider colonoscopy (e.g. if alarm features present, family history of IBD, or age >50). If colonoscopy is
performed and appears normal, random colonic biopsies should be taken

Treatment
+ education: reassurance, explanation, support, aim for realistic goals
+ psychological therapies with most evidence: cognitive behavioural therapy, gut-directed hypnotherapy, and
mindfulness-based stress reduction
+ Less evidence: relaxation therapy, biofeedback, hypnosis, probably exercise
+ dietary: low FODMAP (Fermentable Oligo-, Di-, Monosaccharides And Polyols) diet for pain, bloating, gas, diarrhea
+ symptom-guided treatment
= pain predominant
. antispasmodic medication before meals (e.g. hyoscine, pinaverium, trimebutine - low level of
evidence)
+ tricyclic antidepressants (TCA)
serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs)
+ selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRI)- only helpful to treat concomitant anxiety or depression
ifit is felt that this is the main contributor to patient’s symptoms. No evidence that it helps pain in IBS
* peppermint oil
probiotics can improve abdominal pain, bloating, and flatulence. Some evidence for use of
lactobacillus or bifidobacterium species
= IBS-D
+ increase soluble fibre (bran or psyllium) to increase stool consistency but may worsen abdominal gas
or bloating (controversial)
+ eluxadoline
¢ rifaximin
= IBS-C
+ increase soluble fibre in diet (can increase bloating which can worsen IBS symptoms)
PEG 3350 can be used to alter stool form but no evidence that it helps abdominal pain in IBS
linaclotide, plecanatide, tenapanor
osmotic or other laxatives (help more with the constipation than the pain)

.

eee

Prognosis
+ 80% improve over time
+ most have intermittent episodes
+ normal life expectancy

Constipa

Definition
+ passage of infrequent/hard stools and/or difficult stool evacuation (e.g. straining, sensation of anorectal blockage)

Epidemiology
+ increasing prevalence with age; F>M
+ rare in Africa and India where stool weight is 3-4x greater than in Western countries

Etiology
+ most common: functional, idiopathic
* organic causes: likely only if there are symptoms other than constipation
= medication side effects (e.g. narcotics, antidepressants) are the most common

Toronto Notes 2025

IBS Mimickers
Enteric infections e.g. Giardia

Lactose intolerance/other disaccharidase
deficiency

co

Celiac sprue

Drug:induced diarrhea

Diet induced (excess tea, coffee, colas)

Aifaximin Therapy fr Patents with Intable Bowel
Syndrome without Constipation

NeIM 20113642232

Purpose: Previous evidence suggests that gut ora may
play an important rol inthe pathophysiology ofS.
This study evaluated ifaxinin a minimally absorbed
antibiotic in treating 8S without constipation
Methods: Two phase 3, double ing placebo-
ontoled tials (TARGET and TARGET 2.1260 patients
whoad BS without constipation wererandomly
assigned torfaxinin (650 dose or placebo, i
fox 2k, with follow-up of 10 wk. The primary
endpoint was adequate slfeported ei of global
18S symptoms.

Results Significantly morepatiensin the rfaximin
up had adequate sel reported rele of bal
{BS symptoms compared tothe placebo grup during
theirs wkafter treatment 40.8% ws. 31.2%,
respectively. Also, more patents in therifaimin group

Causes of Constipation

DOPED
Drugs

Obstruction

Pain

Endocrine dysfunction
Depression
