vs4 ‘Vascular Surgery

Table 1. Rutherford ALI Classification

Category Description/Prognosis Findings Doppler Signals Treatment
Sensoryloss Muscle SkinChanges Arterial Venous
Weakness
Wiable Notimmediately threatened None None Normal ‘Audible ‘Audible Delay treatment until
imestigations result
HaMarginally Salvageableifprompt Minimal toes) None Cook with Inautible —Audible-—_Investigatebefore
Threatened treated ornone prolonged treatment, but reat soon
copillary refill,
IbImmediately Salvageable with immediate Morethantoes, Mild, Coldwithnon- Inaudible Audible. Emergency reperfusion
Threatened revascularization associatedwith moderate ‘fixed motting
rest pain
Mireversible Major tissue loss or Profound, Profound, Fixed ottingor Inaudible Inaudible Amputation likely
permanent nerve damage anesthetic paralysis gangrene

inevitable igor)

‘Adapted from: Rutherford RB, Baker JD, Ernst etal. Recommended standards for reports dealing with ower extremity ischemia: revised version, JVasc Sug, 1997,2651738.

Treatment
+ immediate unfractionated heparinization with weight-based bolus (70-100 IU/kg) and continuous infusion
to titrate PTT to 70-90
+ IV fluids, urine output monitoring, analgesia, supplemental O2
+ if impaired neurovascular status: emergent revascularization (Rutherford category IIb)
+ if intact neurovascular status: may have time for workup (including CTA)
+ identify and treat underlying cause
» embolus: embolectomy
* thrombus: thrombectomy + bypass graft + endovascular therapy
= irreversible ischemia (ie. Rutherford category II): primary amputation or palliation
= arterial aneurysm: bypass/stent graft
+ continue heparin postoperatively; start oral anticoagulant postoperatively when stable x3 mo or longer
depending on underlying etiology and other comorbidities

Complications

+ local: compartment syndrome secondary to reperfusion (see , OR10) with prolonged
ischemia; requires 4-compartment (anterior/lateral/superficial and deep posterior) fasciotomy in cal!

+ heart: risk ‘of arthythmi. MI, cardiac arrest, and death with reperfusion injury

+ kidneys/other organs: renal failure and multi-organ failure due to toxic metabolites from ischemic muscle,
rhabdomyolysis

* up to 10% chance of metachronous embolism

Prognosis
+ 40% 1-yr mortality rate
+ 5-40% morbidity rate (amputation)

Peripheral Arterial Disease

Definition

+ chronic ischemia due to inadequate arterial supply to meet cellular metabolic demands during walking
(claudication) or at rest (CLT)

Etiology and Risk Factors

+ predominantly due to atherosclerosis (for pathogenesis, see Cardiology and Cardiac Surgery, C30);
primarily occurs in the lower extremities

+ modifiable risk factors: smoking, DM, hyperlipidemia, HTN, obesity, and sedentary lifestyle

+ non-modifiable risk factors: advanced age, and PMHx or FMHx of PAD/CAD/CVD

Clinical Features
+ claudication:
1. pain with exertion: usually in calves or any exercising muscle group
2. relieved by short rest: less than 5 min and no postural changes necessary
3. reproducible: same distance or time to elicit pain, same location of pain, same amount of rest to
relieve pain
4, an asymptomatic pulse deficit: mandates medical management
— the presence of the preceding features differentiates vascular claudication from
neurogenic claudication or MSK pain

+ CLTI:
1. includes rest pain, night pain, and/or tissue loss (ulceration or gangrene) in a patient with existing
PAD for at least 2 wk
2. pain most commonly over the forefoot/toes, waking person from sleep, and often relieved by hanging
foot off bed

Toronto Notes 2025

Distinction between CLTI and ALI

ALI:A precipitous decrease and/

‘or cessation in blood flow to a limb
threatening viability. Typically, due to
arterial embolism or thrombosis, or other
acute cause. Characterized by rapidly
worsening leg pain that is present for <2 wk
{usually hto d); may occur in patients with
‘oF without history of claudication

CTI: Severe manifestation of PAD where
blood flow to the extremities is markedly

reduced. Defined as ischemic foot pain at
test or at night, occurring >2 wk, wounds,
‘or gangrene in patients who may (or may
not) have a history of claudication

Acute Aortoiliac Occlusion
Ifa patient presents with new onset
bilateral ALI, suspect possible occlusion of
the aorta or aortoiliac segment. Etiologies
include thrombosis or rupture of AAA, aortic
dissection, of large saddle embolism
