ERI6 Emergency Medicine
UPPER EXTREMITY INJURIES
+ anterior shoulder dislocation
axillary nerve (lateral aspect of shoulder) and musculocutaneous nerve (extensor aspect of forearm) at
risk
seen on lateral view: humeral head anterior to glenoid
many techniques for reduction (e.g. traction, scapular manipulation), immobilize in internal rotation,
repeat x-ray, out-patient follow-up with orthopedics
with forceful injury, look for fracture
+ Colles’ fracture

« distal radius fracture with dorsal displacement from “Fall on Outstretched Hand” (FOOSH)
anteroposterior film: radial shortening, radial deviation, radial displacement
lateral film: dorsal displacement, volar angulation
reduce, immobilize with splint, out-patient follow-up with orthopedics or immediate orthopedic
referral if complicated fracture
if involvement of articular surface, consider outpatient fracture clinic or orthopedic referral if
unsatisfactory reduction in ED
+ scaphoid fracture
tenderness in anatomical snuff box, pain on scaphoid tubercle, pain on axial loading of thumb
negative x-ray: thumb spica splint, repeat x-ray in 1 wk + CT scan/bone scan
positive x-ray: thumb spica splint x 6-8 wk, repeat x-ray in 2 wk
treat based on clinical suspicion even in absence of radiological scaphoid fracture
risk of AVN of scaphoid if not immobilized
outpatient orthopedic follow-up

LOWER EXTREMITY INJURIES
knee injuries
= see Ottawa Knee Rules
pelvic injuries (see Orthopedic Surgery, OR29)
ankle and foot fractures
= see Ottawa Ankle and Foot Rules
avulsion of the base of 5th metatarsal
= occurs with inversion injury
= supportive tensor or below knee walking boot for 3 wk
calcaneal fracture
= associated with fall from height
= associated with axial loading (other injuries may involve ankles, knees, hips, pelvis, lumbar spine)

Aknee x-ray examination is required only for acute injury patients with one or more of:

+ Age 55 yr or older

+ Tenderness at head of fibula

+ Isolated tenderness of patella

+ Inability to flex to 90°

+ Inability to bear weight both immediately and in the ED (four steps)

Figure 7. Ottawa knee rules
‘Maple trom: te 16, Wel GA, Hoag RH, tal. JAMA 1997;278:2075-207,

Toronto Notes 2025

LATERAL VIEW Anankle radiographic seriesis
required only if there is any painin
‘A. Posterior maleolar zone and any of these
edge ortip of findings:
lateral
malleolus

1.Bony tendemess at A
or
2. Bony tendemess at B
or
3.inabilty to bear weight both
immediately andin ED

Arradiographicseriesis required only
if there is any painin midfoot zone

B. Posterior and any ofthese findings:
edge ortip of
medial 1.Bony tenderness at C
malleolus or
2.Bony tendemess at D
or
7 3. Inability to bear weight both
D. Navicular immediately and in ED

Natalie Cormier 2016

Figure 8. Ottawa ankle and foot rules
‘Aapted from: tel 16, McKnight RO, Greenberg GH, etal. JAMA 1994:271:227-822

8

1.Dorsaltit g

2. Dorsal displacement 2

3.U!narstybid fracture a

4.Radial displacement &

5. Racial tit a

6. Shortening 2
Figure 5. Colles’ fracture

Radius

Scaphoid

Trapezium

Trapezoid

Capitate

Metacarpal

bones (15)

Elisheva Marcus

Figure 6. Carpal bones
