ER26 Emergency Medicine

Table 16. Concurrent Investigation and Management of Status Epilepticus

Timing Steps

Refractory If status persistsafter maximum doses above, consut ICUand start one or more of:
Phenobarbital 20 mg/kgIV at 50 mg/min

Midazolam 0.2 mg/kg loading dose and 01-04 majkgyh

Propofol 2 mg/kg I at2-5 mg/kg/hthen loading dose then 2-1 markg/h

Requites definitive airway management incuding rapid sequence intubation and assisted ventilation. Electroencephalography (EEG) for continuous monitoring
PostSeizure Investigate underlying cause: consider CT, LP, MR, ICP monitoring

Note: llnterventions shouldbe done as soon as possible. Adapted trom Brophy etal. Guidelines forthe evaluation and management of status eieptcus. Neurocit Care 201211:323

Disposition
+ decision to admit or discharge should be based on the underlying disease process identified
= ifa patient had a brief generalized seizure and has returned to baseline function and is neurologically
intact, then generally discharge with outpatient follow-up
+ first-time seizure patients being discharged should be referred to a neurologist for follow-up
+ admitted patients should generally have a neurology consult
+ patient should not drive until medically cleared (local regulations vary)
= complete notification form to appropriate authority regarding ability to drive
+ warn regarding other safety concerns (e.g. no swimming, bathing children alone, etc.)

Shortness of Breath
+ see Respirology, R3 and Cardiology and Cardiac Surgery, C6
Definition

+ dyspnea is the subjective sensation of SOB or difficulty breathing
Table 17. Differential Diagnosis for Dyspnea

High Mortality Morbidity Usually Less Emergent
Respiratory Airway obstruction foreign body, epiglottti, abscess, anaphylaxis) Chronic obstructive, interstialor restrictive lung disease
Pneuma/hemothorax Pleural fusion (dependent onseverity)
as exchange (pulmonary edema, PE, preumonia, acute exacerbations of
asthma, or COPD)
Pleural effusion (dependent on severity)
Cardiac CCHF Mi, valvular disease, tamponade, arrhythmia
Metabolic Metabolic acidsis NYD, toxin ingestion ‘Anemia, hemogobinopathy
Neuromuscular Myastheniagravis, diaphragmatic paralysis CNS tesion, primary muscle weakness
Other Deconditioning, respiratory splinting due tounrelated pain Anxiety

History and Physical Exam

+ acute SOB is often due to a relatively limited number of conditions; associated symptoms and signs are key

to the appropriate diagnosis
substernal chest pain with cardiac ischaemia
fever, cough, and sputum with respiratory infections
urticaria with anaphylaxis
wheezing with acute bronchospasm
environmental or occupational exposures
+ dyspnea may be the sole complaint and the physical exam may reveal few abnormalities (e.g. PE,
pneumothorax)
+ Vitals including pulse oximetry
= wheeze and stridor (ventilatory) vs. crackles (parenchymal), JVP, and murmurs

Investigations
+ blood work
= CBC and differential (hematocrit to exclude anemia), electrolytes, consider ABG/V BG.
= serial cardiac enzymes and ECG if considering cardiac source
= PERC or Wells scores to consider appropriateness of D-dimer
+ imaging
= CXR (hyperinflation and bullous disease suggestive of obstructive lung disease, or changes in
interstitial markings consistent with inflammation, infection, or interstitial fluid)
= CT chest may be indicated in acute dyspnea, specifically when suspicion for thromboembolic disease
(ie. PE)

Disposition

+ historyand physical exam lead to accurate diagnoses in patients with dyspnea in approximately two-thirds

of cases; the decision to admit or discharge should be based on the underlying disease process identified
and its severity
= severe COPD/CHF: non-invasive positive pressure ventilation (NIPPV) may reduce the need for
intubation; cosider intubation if NIPPV will not be tolerated (e.g. decreased LOC, vomiting)
+ if discharging, organize follow-up and educate regarding signs to return to hospital

Toronto Notes 2025

@

Intramuscilarvs Intravenous Therapy for
Prehospital Status pilepticus
NEIM2012;366:581-600

Purpose: To investigate the efficacy of intramuscular
(0M) midazolam with that of lorazepamfor children
and adutsin status epileptic treated by paramedics.
Methods: Duble-bindandomized, non-nferoity
trial. Subjects whose convusions had persisted more
than 5 min and were stl convulsing after paramedics
arrived were given the study medication by ether IM or
‘Wintuion Primary outcome: absence of seizures atthe
time of arvalinthe emergency department without
the ned forrescuetherapy.

Results: Seizures were absent without rescue therapy
inT3%ofthe IM-midazlam group and in 634% ofthe
Morzepam group (P<,001for noninferiority and
superiority), The median tiesto active treatment were
4L2minin the IM midazolam group and48 min in the
‘Morazepam group, with corresponding median times
fromactive treatment to cessation of convulsions of3.3
nin and'6 min, Adverse-evet rates were similar.
Conclusions: For subjectsn status epilepticus,
‘Mmidazolam is atleast assafe and efectve as NV
lorazepamfor prehospital seizure cessation,
