GM8 Geriatric Medicine

+ havea witness present, if possible, for interview
+ physical exam: orthostatic BP, injury screen, cardiac, visual acuity, examination of feet and footwear, gait
assessment, Timed Up-and-Go Test, MSK, neurologic

Investigations
+ CGA to identify potential causes
+ investigations should be tailored based on history and physical examination. They might consist of:
= CBC, electrolytes, BUN, creatinine, glucose, Ca**, TSH, vitamin B12, urinalysis, cardiac enzymes, ECG,
CT head (as directed by history and physical), coagulation profile
+ bone densitometry (dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry) for osteoporosis screening in all women and men
>65yr

Interventions

interventions depend on the identified intrinsic and extrinsic risk factors. First address any acute illness
that precipitated the fall and treat any injuries or complications

multidisciplinary, multifactorial, health and environmental risk factor assessment, and intervention
programs in the community

muscle strengthening, balance retraining (e.g. Tai Chi) with appropriate assistive devices, and group
exercise programs

home hazard assessment and modification with potential for collaboration with occupational therapy (e.g.
remove loose rugs and tripping hazards, add shower bars and stair railing, improve lighting)

fitted gait aid

taper or gradual discontinuation of psychotropic medication

postural hypotension, heart rate, and rhythm abnormalities management

eyesight (cataract surgery) and footwear optimization

compression socks if venous stasis edema

hip protectors

prescription of vitamin D 1000 IU daily if vitamin D stores are low

optimization of daily calcium intake via diet or calcium supplementation calcium in diet with 1200 mg of
supplemental calcium advised if osteoporosis is a risk

Frailty

Definition

+ frailty: clinically-recognizable state of decreased reserve in older adults with increased vulnerability to
acute stressors resulting from functional decline across multiple physiologic systems

functional decline: progressive limitation in the ability to carry out BADLs and [ADL

frailty is associated with higher risk of in-hospital death, adverse events, length of stay, hospital re-
admission, and newly dependent at discharge following critical illness

1 Very Fit 4 Very Mild Fraility 7 Severe Frailty
People who are robust, active, Previcusy “winerable” Early Completely dependent on others
‘energetic and motivate. ‘ranstion fram complete for personal cre, from whatever
They tendto exercise regularly independence. While nt dependent cause ptysicl or cogitiva,
andre among the fitest for ‘on hers for daly help, often venso, they seem stable and
thelr age. \ symptoms imi activites common ‘ot athigh tsk of dying (within
‘compli is being “slowedup” “61m0).
‘andor being ted during the day.
2 Fit 5 Mild Fraitty 8 Very Severe Fralty
People who have no active More evident sowing and need Completely dependent for
disease symptoms, but are ess ft help with high order ADLs personal care and
than category". ten, they (finances, transportation, heavy approaching the endo fe.
‘exercise orare very active housework). Mi faty ically, they could not
‘occasional (e.g. Seasonally progessivelyimpnirs shopping, recover even froma minor
‘waking alone outsle, mel prep, ness.
medications and begins to restrict
light housework.
3 Managing Well 6 Moderate Fraitty 9 Terminally it
People whose medical problems Need help with al ouside actives ‘Approaching he endof ite
‘are well controled, evenif ‘and housekeeping Often have People witha ie expectancy of
‘occasionay symptomatic butare problems wit stairs, ned help <6 mo, whoare not otherwise
not requly active beyond bathing and mightneed minimal ving with severe tay. Many
routine waking assistance with dressing (cing, ‘terminal il people can stil

standby). exercise until very close to deat

Mild Dementia Moderate Dementia ‘Severe Dementia
Connersyuponsindefgtngtie —«Reen'ney eympadcen Teja doped ca ithe
Saulbe ote vt, tg thug ey soon an enenbe :
fenenetnghe crm ise eperig te pivenesecondopesonn —-YervsevereDementa
Siequsinvdoyondsoilwidnea, Ege win ramping Ta any evry

Figure 2. Rockwood Clinical Frailty Scale
‘Adapted from and reprinted with permission: Geriatric Medicine Research Dalhousie University, Halifax, Canada. ©2005-2020 Verson 20. Alright reserved

Toronto Notes 2025

Key Clinical History Findings in Falls
Evaluation

SPLATT
Symptoms

Previous alls

Location of falls

Activity at the time of fall
Time of fall

Trauma

isofthe impact of Medication lasses
Elderly Persons

Arch inter Med 200816921) 1952-1960

Inpactof Medication Classes on Falls Riskin Geriatrics
(Os Ratios)

Antidepressant (1.68)

Neuroleptisantisychotics (1.59

‘Benzodiazepines (1.57)

Sedatves/hypnotics (1.47)

Antihypertensive agen (1.24

NSAID (121

Direc (107)

Plocters (101)

Word Guidelines forall Prevention and
Management for Older Adu
Ageand Ageing, 2022;519),
Purpose: Tocreatea set of evidence-based falls
‘reventon and management recommendations that
ane applicable to older adults and forue by healthcare
professionals

Recommendations: loleraduts shouldbe
counseled on fl preenton and physical activity For
ommuniy-dwelng older adults, oportnsticcase
finding fr falsisrecommended, For adults at igh rsh,
2 comprehensive muta cori fal risk assessment
and personalized multidomain intervention should

be provided

Conclusions: The set of recommendations wilrequre
flexible implementation strategies and shoud consider
A patient-centered approach

