GM20 Geriatric Medicine Toronto Notes 2025
Trial Name Reference Clinical Trial Details

HYPERTENSION IN THE ELDERLY

SPRINT Revisited Hypertension 202%78(6):1701-1710 Title: SPRINT Revisited: Updated Results and Implications

Purpose: The purpose of this manuscripis toreview current evidence fr the clinical implications ofthe Systolic BloodPressure Intervention Trial
(SPRINT)

Results: The procedures that were usedto measure blood pressure in SPRINT are consistent withthose used in simiar clinical outcome trials. The
‘original SPRINT results showed 43% reduction (P=0.005) in cardiovascular death and 38% reduction (P=0,002 in acute decompensated heart
failure. Meta-analyses of trials that have compared randomly assigning paticipantsto different blood pressure levels provide similar results,
Conclusions: Thefindings fram SPRINT illetrate that more intensive reduction in blood pressure results in significant health benefits. Inorder to
‘generalizetheresults of SPRINT to dinical practice, thereneeds to be accurateblood pressure assessment, as well as evidence of cardiovascular
tisk.

INAPPROPRIATE PRESCRIBING IN THEELDERLY

EMPOWER JAMA Intern Med 2014:174:890-98
‘STOPP and START Int J ClinPharmacol Ther 2008;46:72-
83

Title: Reductionof Inappropriate Benzodiazepine Prescriptions Among Older Aduts Through Dect Patient Education: The Empower Cluster
Randomized Trial

Purpose: Compare the effectof drect-t-consumer educationagainst usual careon benzodiazepine discontinuation inolder adult

Methods: 303 long-term users of benzodiazepines aged 65-95 were randomized tothe educational intervention (depresribing patient
‘empowerment intervention explaining risks of benzodiazepine use anda stepwise taper protocol or the wait ist’ contro. Primary outcomes
‘were benzodiazepine discontinuation ater 6 mo,

Results: At 6 mo, 27% of patients in theintervention grouphad discontinued benzodiazepines, compared with Sin the control group (tsk
difference 23%; 95% C H%sto 32%),

‘Conclusions: Direct-1o-consumer education describing the risksof benzodiazepine use and a stepwise tapering protocol effectively elcits shared
‘decisionmaking and discontinuation of medications that increase the risk of harmin older adults.

Title: STOPP (Screening Too of Older Person's Prescriptions) and START Screening Tool to Alert dactors to Right Treatment). Consensus validation
Purpose: Validate a new screening tool of older persons’ prescriptions, incorporating criteria for potentially inaccurate prescriptions (called
STOPP), and citeria for appropriate prescriptions (called START).

Methods: A Delphi consensus technique wasused to obtain validity from an 18-member expert panel Inter-rater reliability wasassessed by
determining the kappa-statistc on 100 datasets.

Results: STOPP consist of 65 clinically significant criteria for potentially inappropriate prescriptions; START consists of 22 evidence-based
prescribing indicators.

Conclusions: STOPP/START isa valid, reliable, and comprehensive screening ool that enables the prescribing physician toappraise an older
patient's prescriptiondrugsin the contextof hisfher concurrent diagnoses.

