FM43 Family Medicine Toronto Notes 2025

A Summary of the Guideline for the Evidence-Informed Primary Care Management of Low Back Pain
‘is evidenced gue fot on specie nor magpant ow Dick pani ads ot
fed Flags hepidentiy rae, but potentially Yetow Fags inca psychosocial baiersto Rasebrlew nesta
lags helpidentty ae, Yetow psychosocial bars Cochrane Sys ev 20154

i a a eT cae ry Tey nchce: Purpose: To evahatethe effec of massage therapy for
+ Features of Cauda Equina Syndrome incuding + Belief that painand acivity are harmful san-speciclow back pin

sudden or progressive onset of loss of an ees ethos: Meta-analysis an domized or quast

Diaddev/bowel contro, saddle anesthesia . = i=) randonbedbssendoag wef anymore
(EMERGENCY) + Low or negative mood, social withdrawal totally fasts ee ecards s tect
+ Severe worsening pain, especially at night or + Treatment expectations that do not ft best {or no-spectic ow back pai.

‘wen Wing down (URGENT) pracice Rests 13ACTswereidented comparing massage
+ Signtcant trauma (URGENT) + Problems with claim and compensation therapy to theractiveoshamteatments Massage
+ Weight ss, history of cancer, fever (URGE! + History of back pain, ime of, other ceims as sper for pain and function nth shor- and
See ae " posonsawe,pjesosucen ‘ema tee, s

pratt hte ns vc etonc tose ttt sina textes, and superior toon mobization,
° episode of severe back pain + Heavy work, unsocable relation therapy physialtheapy, acupuncture
50 iol erecta £65 Yo COCK) + Overprotective family or lack of support and el-care education, Benefits lasted atleast 1yr

+ Widespread neurological signs S008) pestiteatment. Aapuncre massage wasassocated

‘with better results than ssc Swedish massage, and
EMERGENCY — referral within hours Thaimassage produced similar results the casi
URGENT — referral within 24-48 h massage.
Seema Ci Conclusions: Massage may be beneficial for subacute
and chroicnon-specclow back pain, especialy in
conbiaton wth exercise and education.

ACUTE and SUBACUTE nm CHRONIC
™_ (more than 12 wk since pain onset) @
dt ‘Assodtionof Spinal Manipulative Therapy with
Clinical Benefitand Ham orkcte Low BackPain
MA 2017, 3174511460

Purpose: To systematic review studies abou the
effectiveness and harmsof Spinal Manipulate Therapy
{81 for acute 6 wh lw back pai,

Methods: Systematic review and meta-analysis
induding CTs and observational studies. Evidence
assessed using GRADE crteria, Outcomes suchas
‘ain, function or any harms weremeasured during
G whol SMT,

Results: 15RCTs provided moderate-qultyevdence
that SMT has a statistically significant association with
improvements in pain (pooled mean improvement
inthe 100mm isual analog pain scale, 3.95 (95%
G, 18.6043), 12RCTs (138 patents produced
smoderate-qualty evidence that SMThas statistically
significant association with improvements in function
(pooled mean eect sze,-0.39(95%C1 -07110
0.07), No RCT reported any serious adverse event.
‘Minor transient adverse events such as increased
pain, msc stness, and headache were reported
50-67% ofthe time in arge case seis of patients
treated with SMT.

Condon: SMT in acate bw back pin was associated
with modestimprovements in pain and function at up
to 6 wk, with transient minor MSK harms. However,
heterogeneity in study results was large.

Figure 13. Low back pain treatment

‘Mapted with permission from Toward Optimize Practice (TP) Low Back Pain Working Group. 2015 December. Evidence informed primary care management of low back pan: lic practice
{uideline, Edmonton, AB: Toward Optimized Practice. Appendix! Summary, p. 43-44. aiale from: tps: albertadoctor. org PGSPages/Low- Back: Pain. asp Copyright 2015,
Toward Optinized Pract.

Menopause/Hormone Therapy

see Gynecology, GY36

Definition
+ 12 mo of amenorrhea following the final menstrual period

Epidemiology
+ mean age of menopause is 51.4 yr

Clinical Features

+ associated with estrogen deprivation

+ urogenital tract: atrophy, vaginal dryness/itching, urinary frequency/urgency/incontinence, bleeding
+ vascular: vasomotor instability (e.g. hot flashes), increased risk of heart disease

+ bones: bone loss, joint/muscle/back pain, fractures, loss of height

+ brain: depression, irritability, mood swings, memory loss
