c19 Cardiology and Cardiac Surgery

CARDIAC DISEASE

Arrhythmias

Mechanisms of Arrhythmias

Alterations in Impulse Formation
A. Normal Automaticity
«= impulses from the SA node, caused by spontaneous depolarization, result in the basic cardiac
pacemaker function. “Downstream” cells in the AV node and Purkinje fibres also depolarize
spontaneously, but at a slower rate; they serve as the “backup” pacemaking cells if the upstream rate is
slower than the more distal spontaneous rate
= normal automaticity is influenced by:
neurohormonal tone (sympathetic tone increases and parasympathetic tone decreases spontaneous
firing rate and thus HR)
myocardial ischemia/infarction or other cardiac pathology (e.g. HF) may alter HR via these
mechanisms
abnormal metabolic conditions (e.g. hypoxia, acidosis, hypothermia)
electrolyte abnormalities, especially hyperkalemia which slows HR
drugs (e.g. digitalis, B-blockers, CCB)
athletic training: endurance athletes often have sinus bradycardia
age: elderly often have sinus bradycardia
increased circulatory demand can result in sinus tachycardia (e.g. pregnancy, anemia, exercise)

.

B. Abnormal Automaticity due to Triggered Activity (due to Afterdepolarizations)

1. Early Afterdepolarizations
during the terminal plateau or repolarization phases of action potential
consequence of the membrane potential transiently becoming more positive during repolarization
(depolarization interrupting repolarization)

= these are called EADs and DADs (early and delayed afterdepolarization, respectively)
may result in self-maintaining oscillations of depolarization, giving rise to action potentials thereby
generating a tachyarrhythmia (e.g. new baseline voltage is greater than threshold, which automatically
triggers a new action potential after the refractory period ends)
EADs are the basis for the arrhythmias associated with hypokalemia and QT prolongation, either
congenital or acquired; termed “Torsades de Pointes”

2. Delayed A fterdepolarizations
= occur after the action potential has fully repolarized, but before the next usual action potential
= commonly occurs in situations of high intracellular calcium (e.g. digitalis intoxication, ischemia) or
during enhanced catecholamine stimulation (e.g. “twitchy” pacemaker cells in catecholaminergic
polymorphic VT)

Alterations in Impulse Conduction

A. Re-Entry Circuits
= the presence of self-sustaining re-entry circuit causes rapid repeated depolarizations in a region of
myocardium (see Figure 30, C24, for an example in the context of AV nodal re-entrant tachycardia)
= the conditions necessary for re-entry include block of an impulse into a region of the heart that is
refractory (non-excitable tissue or because of local functional block, where the impulse encounters
tissue still in its refractory period), followed by “re-entry” of the impulse around a region of block to the
site of origin, forming a complete re-entry circuit
* eg, myocardium that is infarcted /ischemic will consist of non-excitable and partially excitable
zones which will promote the formation of re-entry circuits
* most sustained tachyarrhythmias are due to re-entry

B. Conduction Block

«= ischemia, fibrosis, trauma, and drugs can cause transient or permanent, unidirectional or bidirectional

block

= most common cause of block is “functional block” due to refractory myocardium (cardiomyocytes are
in refractory period) or “anatomical block” (area of myocardium unexcitable due to fibrosis); cells in
the conduction system distal to the block can assume pacemaking control if the block occurs along the
specialized conduction system
the consequence of conduction block are re-entry arrhythmias (tachyarrhythmias - see above) or failure
of impulses to conduct to ventricular cells (bradycardia)
= conduction block in the SA node, AV node. or His Purkinje tissue can lead to bradycardia

Toronto Notes 2025

Sinus Arthythmia
‘Normal P waves, with variation of the R-R
interval 0.12 seconds, especially with
respiration, due to varying rate of SA node
depolarization

Respiratory SA
‘Seen more often in young adults

Normal, physiologic results from changes in
autonomic tone during respiratory cycle

Rate increases with inspiration, slows with
expiration

Non-Respiratory SA

‘Seen more often inthe elderly

Can occur in the normal heart; if marked
‘may be due to sinus node dysfunction (e.g.
in heart disease or after digitalis toxicity)

Usually does not require treatment
