C61 Cardiology and Cardiac Surgery

ECG:
no 4
904
2
=
En
§
8 so4
2
30-4 wv
10 4
WwW TIME
si) || Lit, |
SOUND: lini.
S: S. OS Ss S2

© Young M. Kim 2010

Figure 53. Hemodynamics of mitral stenosis

First note that the left atrial pressure exceeds the left ventricular pressure during diastole due to MS and there is a consequent generation of a pressure

gradient across the LA and LV. In diastole, the stenotic mitral valve opens (which corresponds to the 0S) and the passage of blood across the MSresults

in an audible decrescendo murmur. Left atrial contraction prior to S1 increases the pressure gradient resulting in accentuation of the murmur before Stis

audible

Pericardial Disease

Acute Pericarditis

Definition
+ syndrome involving the inflammation of the pericardium that may present with or without a pericardial
effusion
+ pericarditis can be divided into:
= acute (<4-6 wk)
= incessant (>4-6 wk with no remission)
= recurrent (symptom-free remission period of 4-6 wk followed by new onset of pericarditis-associated
signs and symptoms)
= chronic (>3 mo)

Etiology of Pericarditis/Pericardial Effusion
+ idiopathic is most common (presumed to be viral)
= only 14% of cases are infectious
= identifying the etiology is not required in all patients; in nations with low TB prevalence, the most
common causes of pericarditis are generally benign
= viral: Coxsackie virus A, B (most common), echovirus, Parvovirus B19, Epstein-Barr virus, HIV
= bacterial: S. pneumoniae, S. aureus, B. burgdorferi, M. tuberculosis
+ fungal: histoplasmosis, blastomycosis
+ post-MI: acute (direct extension of myocardial inflammation, 1-7 d post-MI), Dressler’s syndrome
(autoimmune reaction, 2-8 wk post-MI)
+ post-cardiac surgery (e.g. CABG), other cardiac procedures (e.g pacemaker insertion or TAVR), or other
trauma
+ metabolic: uremia (common), hypothyroidism
+ neoplasm: Hodgkin’s, breast, lung, renal cell carcinoma, melanoma, lymphoma
+ collagen vascular disease: SLE, polyarteritis, rheumatoid arthritis, scleroderma
+ vascular: dissecting aneurysm
+ other: drugs (e.g. hydralazine), radiation, infiltrative disease (e.g. sarcoidosis), vaccination (e.g. smallpox)
+ autoimmune diseases
+ immune checkpoint-inhibitor-associated pericarditis (severe; requires immunosuppressive therapy)
+ see Figure 54, C62 for a proposed approach to triaging pericarditis

Toronto Notes 2025

a

Transcatheter (TAVR) or Surgical SAVR) Aortic Valve
Replacementininterme diate Risk Patients
(PARTHERII Trial)

NEM 2016374 1609-1620

Purpose: To determine if TAVRandSAVR sulin
dierent survivaates among intermediate-isk
patient with AS.

Methods: Patients with ASwere randomized to

either AVR (N=101) orto SAVR(n=102'), The primary
endpoint was death romany cause o disabling

stoke at2yr

Results: The death ate from an cause or disabling
stroke was siilr inthe TVR and SAVR groups
(P=,00 for noninferiority) Inthe transfemoral-
access cohort, THVRresulted ina lowerrate of death
disabling stroke than SAVR di (P=0.0). Inthe
transthoracic access cohort, similar outcomes were
observed inthe TAVR and SAVR groups TAVR resulted in
larger aorticvale areas and erates of AKI, severe
bleeding, and new onset Ai, Fewer major vascular
complications and les paravaliuar AR were observed
inpatients who underwent SAVR
Condusion:Inintermediate-sk patients with AS, AVR

and disabling stoke.

i)

See Landmark Cardiology and Cardiac
Surgery Trials table for more information on
PARTNER Ill which details the outcomes of
low-risk patients who underwent TAVR or
surgical aortic-valve replacement.

@

Anterior Leaflet Laceration to Prevent Venticular
Outflow Tract Obstruction During Transcatheter
Mitral Valve Replacement (LAMPOOR)

Jon Cll Carl 2019;04:595

Background: Ianscathether mitral ave replacement
(TNR) is routinely employedin patients with

valvular disease who are unstable for open surgical
interventions. The primary complication ofthis
‘procedures LVOT obstruction asa result ofthe anterior
mira eafletimpinging onthe interventricular septum,
Purpose: To stu intentional laceration of th anterior
mitra valve leaflet (LAMPOON) alongside THVR to
prevent the complication of LOT obstruction.
Methods: Between June 2017 and June 2018, 30
patients with severe MRIMS, high surgcalrsh, and
‘hibit risk of VOT obstruction, underwent THUR,
with LAMPOON, Te primary outcomes were technical
successor TMVR and LAMPOON (succesful laceration)
procedures, LVOT gradient Omni, eedomfrom
emergentre-interventon, and procedural mortal
Results: The LAMPOOW laceration was deemed
successflin 100% of enoled patients 100% of
patients survived immediatly ost procedure, with
$3% surviving 30-< after discharge. 90% of patients
had an VOT gadent 30mm optimal range) after
TWYR, with 100% of patients showing LVOT gradient
-<50 mn (acceptable range). The procedural success
rate was 73% from the remaining 22 subjects.
Condusions: nthe studied population, LAMPOON
niigates te riskofLVT obstruction with THN,
LAMPOONis echnical feasible and servesto enable
TWYR inpatients otherwise deemed ineligible due to
rohibtve risk of VOT obstruction
