Gy9 Gynecology

Treatment

Table 4. Management of Amenorrhea

Etiology Management
‘1 AMENORRHEA
als ‘Gonadal resection after puberty
Psychological counselling
Creationof neo-vagina with dilation
Anatomical
Imperforate hymen ‘Surgical management
Transverse vaginal septum ‘Surgical management
Cervical agenesis ‘Suppression and ultimately hysterectomy
Mallerian dysgenesis (MRKH syndrome) Psychological counselling
Creationof neo-vagina with diation
Diagnostic study to confirm normal urinary systemand spine
2 AMENORRHEA
HPO axisdysfunction Identify modifiable underyingcause
Physiologic estrogen replacement with cydic progesterone to decrease rskof osteoporosis, maintain normal vaginal
‘and breast development (considered more physiologic thanOCP)
Correct the problem (weight)
Hyperprolactinemia MRUCT head torule out lesion
Ino demonstrable lesions by MR:

Polycystic ovariansyndrome
Premature ovarian failure

Uterine defect
Asherman's syndrome

Bromocriptine, cabergaline i fetilty desired
CombinedOCPSif nofertit desired

Demonstrable lesionshy MRI surgical management
See Polycystic Ovrian Syndrome, GY25

‘Screen for DM, hypothyroidism, bypoparathyroidism, hypocrtsolism
Hormonal therapy with estrogen and progestinto decrease sk of osteoporosis; can use OCP after induction of

puberty

Evaluation with hysterosalpingography orsonchysterography

Hysteroscopy:excisionof synechiae

Abnormal Ute

e Bleeding

Figure 7. Diagnostic approach to abnormal uterine bleeding

Approach

+ menstrual bleeding should be evaluated by ascertaining: frequency/regularity of menses, duration, volume
of flow, impact on quality of life, and timing (inter- or premenstrual, or breakthrough)

+ isitregular?

= regular: cycle to cycle variability of <20 d - “Can you predict your menses within 20 days?”

= irregular: cycle to cycle variability of >20 d

+ isitheavy?

>8 d of bleeding per cycle or

questions: How frequently do pads/tampons need to be changed? How saturated? Any clots?
280 cc of blood loss per cycle or

bleeding that significantly affects quality of life

Toronto Notes 2025

2° amenorthea is pregnancy until proven
otherwise

The most common cause of
postmenopausal bleeding is genitourinary
syndrome of menopause (atrophy).
However, endometrial cancer and
hyperplasia must be ruled out with an
endometrial biopsy before treatment for
genitourinary syndrome of menopause
(atrophy). 10% of post menstrual bleeding is
endometrial cancer.

‘Abnormal Uterine Bleeding
Change in frequency, duration, or amount
of menstrual flow that affects quality of life.
