GY34 Gynecology

+ non-menstrual TSS (gynecologic)
= diaphragm, cervical cap, or sponge use (prolonged use, i.e. >24h)
«= surgical and postpartum wound infections, mastitis, sinusitis, osteomyelitis, arthritis, burns,
cutaneous lesions, etc.

Clinical Features

+ sudden high fever/chills

sore throat, headache, and diarrhea

macular erythroderma followed by desquamation 1-2 wk later
signs of multisystem organ failure

refractory hypotension

Treatment

+ treatment of shock

remove potential sources of infection (e.g. foreign objects)

surgical debridement (if warranted)

adequate hydration

empiric antibiotic therapy with vancomycin (load 20-35 mg/kg and maintenance 15-20 mg/kg q8-12 h) +
clindamycin 900 mg IV q8 h + piperacillin-tazobactam 4.5 g IV q6h

+ continue combination therapy until patient is hemodynamically stable for at least 48-72 h

Surgical Infections

Postoperative Infections in Gynecological Surgery
+ pelvic cellulitis
= common post-hysterectomy, affects vaginal vault
= erythema, induration, tenderness, and discharge involving vaginal cuff
= if fever and leukocytosis, treat with broad-spectrum ABx (i.e. clindamycin and gentamicin)
= drain if excessive purulence or large mass
= can result in intra-abdominal and pelvic abscess

« see General and Thoracic Surgery, Postoperative Fever, GS8

Sexual Abuse

« see Emergency Medicine, ER27 and Family Medicine, FM46

Sexuality and Sexual Dysfunction

SEXUAL RESPONSE

1, desire: energy that allows an individual to initiate or respond to sexual stimulation (libido)

2. arousal: physical and emotional stimulation leading to breast and genital vasodilation and clitoral
engorgement (excitement)

3. orgasm: physical and emotional stimulation is maximized, allowing the individual to relinquish their sense
of control

4, resolution: most of the congestion and tension resolves within seconds, complete resolution may take up to
60 min

+ Note: this framework cannot be applied consistently to a patient's sexual response. For many patients, the
phases may vary in sequence, overlap, repeat, or be absent during some or all sexual encounters

SEXUAL DYSFUNCTION

Classification
«+ lack of desire (most common)
+ lack of arousal
+ anorgasmia

= primary anorgasmia: never achieved orgasm under any circumstances

= secondary anorgasmia: was able to achieve orgasms before but unable to achieve orgasms presently
+ dyspareunia: painful intercourse, can be superficial or deep

Etiology
+ biological:
= gynecological (e.g. pregnancy, childbirth, menopausal atrophy, endometriosis, prolapse, urinary
incontinence, episiotomy, pelvic inflammatory disorder)
urological (e.g. recurrent UTI, chronic renal failure)
vascular (e.g. peripheral vascular disease, CAD)
neurological dysfunction (e.g. nerve entrapment syndrome, spinal cord injury, multiple sclerosis,
Parkinson’s)

Toronto Notes 2025
