RI3 Respirology

S. aureus and H. influenzae: early
P. aeruginosa: most common in adulthood

Burkholderia cepacia complex: worse prognosis (some subtypes) so infection control is key
in adults, colonization with more resistant bacteria increases (e.g. PsA, B. cepacia complex,
Stenotrophomonas, Achromobacter, MRSA, NTM etc.)

Investigations
+ genetic testing
= autosomal recessive- more than 2100 mutations in CFTR described, not all are disease causing
sweat chloride test
«= increased concentrations of NaCl and K* [Cl] >60 mmol/L on two occasions supports the diagnosis)
«= single mutation carriers have normal sweat tests (and no disease)
PFTs
« early: airflow limitation in small airways
« late: severe airflow obstruction, hyperinflation, gas trapping
ABGs
= hypoxemia, hypercapnia later in disease with eventual respiratory failure, and cor pulmonale
CXR
= hyperinflation, increased pulmonary markings (especially upper lobes)

Treatment

+ chest physiotherapy

+ punetetlcenryme replacements, high fat, high calorie diet

ronchodilators (salbutamol + ipratropium bromide)

inhaled mucolytic (reduces mucus viscosity): hypertonic saline, DNase

inhaled antibiotics (tobramycin, colistin, aztreonam, levofloxacin, vancomycin)

anti-in flammatory medications (e.g. azithromycin, ICS if concurrent asthma)

antibiotics oral and IV (targeted to sputum growth if available, e.g. ciprofloxacin for Pseudomonas)
+ CFTR modulators (e.g. Ivacaftor, Orkambi’, Symdeko, Trikafta)

+ lung transplant

Prognosis
+ worse prognosis associated with: frequent pulmonary exacerbations, rapid rate of decline of FEV:,

supplemental oxygen requ juirement with exercise or sleep, worsening malnutrition, infection with difficult to
a

manage organism, CF-related DM, pneumothorax, massive hemoptysis
+ female sex and low socioeconomic class have greater risk of early death

+ agroup of disorders which cause diffuse parenchymal lung disease, with progressive scarring of lung tissue
and impairment in lung function and gas exchange

Pathophysiology

+ inflammatory and/or fibrosing process in the alveolar walls > distortion and destruction of normal alveoli

and microvasculature
+ typlally associated with:
= lung restriction (decrease in TLC and VC)
decreased lung compliance (increased or normal FEV:/FVC)
impaired diffusion (decreased DLCO)
hypoxemia due to V/Q mismatch (usually without hypercapnia until end stage)
pulmonary HTN and cor pulmonale occur with advanced disease secondary to hypoxemia and blood
vessel destruction

Etiology

+ IPF is the most common cause; however, there are numerous other causes including medication and
connective tissue disorders

+ acareful review of risk factors (e.g. organic/inorganic exposures, connective tissue disease symptoms,
occupational history, medications) is needed during patient evaluation

Toronto Notes 2025

ly presents in childhood as recurrent
lung infections that become persistent
and chronic

(2)

Correctos (speci Therapies For Cass I CFTR
Mutations) for Cystic basis

Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 20188:C0010966
Purpose: To evaluate the eects of cyst ross
transmembrane receptor (CFTR) comectors on clinically
important outcomes, both benefitsand hams, in
children and adits with CFand ssl CFTR mutations
{ost commonly F5084e).

Methods: RTs comparing CFTR correctrst placebo in
people with class mutations were searched the
Cochrane ysticFbrosisand Genetic Disorders Cystic
Fbosis Reger. To auhorsindependemy extracted
data and assessed isk of bias and qual of evidence
sing GRADE citer

Results The quality-fife scores espiatory domain
favoured combination therapy (bth Luma aftor-
ivacaftor and teacatorivacaftor compared t placebo
time points. The mean increase in cystic fibrosis
questionaire (CFO) scores wth twice day tezaaftor
(100mg) andivacftor (150mg) was approximately 5
int (95% Cl 3.20 to 7.00; 504 participants; moderate
quality evidence). FEV predicted improved with both
combination therapies compared to placebo at 6m, by
5.21% wih lumacaftorivacttorO0 (95% 13.610
680%; 504 participations; hgh quality evidence), and
ty 240% withlumacatvacftor BD (95% Cl 0.40%
10 440%; 204 participants; low- quay evidence).
More particpans receiving the lama cfr ivacaftor
combination reported ear breathlessness (0R2.05;
$95 C11.10t0183; 739 participants; igh quolty
evidence) These adverse effects wer not reported in
thetezacaftrvacaftor studies.

CondsionsOveral, the deployment of combination
CFTRcorrector therapies improve qualty-af-He and
Jung function in patents wth class CF, compared to
placebo contro verse drg eects canbe mitigated
with the use of tezacaftovacator, when inky
indicated

In ILD Think
FASST and RAIDS

Upper Lung Disease (FASST)
Farmers lung (HP)
‘Ankylosing spondylitis
Sarcoidosis

Silicosis

8

Lower Lung Disease (RAAIDS)
Rheumatoid Arthritis
Asbestosis

Amiodarone

IPF

Drugs

‘Sderoderma
